[Amit Varma]: What kind of person changes a world? The kind of person who does two things. One, she looks
[Amit Varma]: around and tries, always, to see the world as it is. We normalize a lot of what is wrong
[Amit Varma]: with this world, but a freethinker looks past conventional norms and sees fault lines that
[Amit Varma]: may be unseen to others. For example, women have always been second class citizens in
[Amit Varma]: this country, treated as being merely instrumental to the needs of men. It is convenient for
[Amit Varma]: men, and even for many women, to keep blinkers on, to refuse to see the full extent of this.
[Amit Varma]: But for the sake of our society, it's important to go past these blinkers, to look into the
[Amit Varma]: void and give a name to what is there. But this is just the first step. The second step
[Amit Varma]: is to actually do something to challenge conventional structures, to make a difference in the real
[Amit Varma]: world that goes beyond posturing and signaling and ranting in private. My guest today is
[Amit Varma]: one such audacious dreamer who did something crazy a few decades ago. She looked around
[Amit Varma]: and saw that women in India didn't really have a voice. They didn't really have a platform
[Amit Varma]: where they could express themselves. They didn't have anyone who took them seriously.
[Amit Varma]: So she started a feminist publishing house meant to discover these voices, to empower
[Amit Varma]: them, to enable the telling of stories that then instantly reached so many others who
[Amit Varma]: might have thought that they were alone. The conventional thinking in the 1980s might have
[Amit Varma]: been, are they really readers for a feminist publishing house? Forget readers, where are
[Amit Varma]: the writers? These questions were flawed because it took a view of the world as it was, and
[Unknown]: not as it could be.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is a legendary feminist author and publisher
[Amit Varma]: Urvashi Botalia. Urvashi got involved in the feminist movement in the 1970s when she had
[Amit Varma]: a job in publishing. She then decided to combine her expertise with her passion, and in 1984,
[Amit Varma]: co-founded Kali for Women, a publishing house dedicated to books by women, for women. They
[Amit Varma]: published a number of seminal books, and she later branched into starting Zuban Books,
[Amit Varma]: which continues the good work to this day. As an author, she also published a path-breaking
[Amit Varma]: book on partition called The Other Side of Silence, which moved me so much when I read
[Amit Varma]: it. Her life has been so rich, and her contribution to Indian feminism and publishing so immense
[Amit Varma]: that a single conversation can only capture a small slice of it, and I was so glad when
[Amit Varma]: she agreed to give me four hours of her time. I entered the conversation already awestruck,
[Amit Varma]: and exited it admiring her even more deeply. We spoke about many things, the persistence
[Amit Varma]: of memory, the other side of silence, how women deal with the dormant anger that remains
[Amit Varma]: unseen to men, the fault lines that became evident during partition, and that are around
[Amit Varma]: us even today. I found this to be such a rich conversation. But before we get to it, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break. Though I don't have a commercial, but I do have a break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150, and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Urvashi, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. Great to be here.
[Amit Varma]: I have to admit that, you know, I've spoken with a lot of formidable women on this podcast,
[Amit Varma]: but I feel a little intimidated today because of your enormous body of work, and which is
[Amit Varma]: intimidating because it is so formidable and amazing. And also that you're a person who
[Amit Varma]: yourself has done so many oral histories as it were, but perhaps that makes you the best
[Amit Varma]: person I could have a conversation with.
[Guest]: I can never understand why people feel intimidated by me, you know, I, my own self images, I'm
[Guest]: just your ordinary straight next door kind of gal. I mean, it's I got gray hair, but
[Guest]: big deal. So do lots of other women. But anyway, don't be intimidated.
[Amit Varma]: Great, you've put me at ease immediately. I'm going to treat you like the next door
[Amit Varma]: gal. So let's let's sort of start from your childhood. You were born in 1952 in Ambala.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your childhood, your family, where did you grow up? What were
[Amit Varma]: those early years like? Give me a sense of the texture of your days as you were growing
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Guest]: Well, I grew up in Ambala, which was then in Punjab. It had a very strong sense of being
[Guest]: Punjabi. It was also where a lot of partitioned refugees traveled and housed, including my
[Guest]: parents, both of whom were partitioned refugees, both of whom came independently and they married
[Guest]: later.
[Guest]: You know, Ambala was like all small towns. Everybody knew everybody else, rather wonderful.
[Guest]: We lived in in a place called the Grand Hotel, which was like a residential hotel. So people
[Guest]: lived there for years and years and years. And we used to sleep outside in the open air
[Guest]: under the Imli tree that we had. And we had lots of Radkirani along the drive of the house.
[Guest]: So I still remember that perfume very well. And I have three siblings and there's a whole
[Guest]: lot of children around. And we all played a lot together, all kinds of pranks and such
[Guest]: like. There are many incidents that stand out in my mind from that time. Some of sneaking
[Guest]: into people's homes to steal the fruit that grew on trees and getting caught. I remember
[Guest]: that once one of the people who worked with us, a domestic help, he was a poor chap, pulled
[Guest]: into doing these pranks with us. And he broke his arm and was really hauled up by the neighbors.
[Guest]: We had gone in to steal, you know, the bael fruit that comes in the summer. So we would
[Guest]: love it because we could break it and take out the pulp and eat it. So there were things
[Guest]: like that. My mother was a teacher. She was teaching then at I think she taught at a school.
[Guest]: I can't remember. And my father used to work with the Tribune. The Tribune had moved from
[Guest]: Lahore via Simla to Ambala and then eventually to Chandigarh. So he was working in the Tribune
[Guest]: and my mom was running the house and working. And we had our entire extended family staying
[Guest]: with us. My grandmother, my chachas, my maasi, because my parents kind of looked after all
[Guest]: of them. I don't know how we managed to live a life because really, I think my mom earned
[Guest]: 350 rupees and my father earned perhaps 450 rupees. That was it. And we had eight or nine
[Guest]: people living in the house and they all got married from there. All my chachas and my
[Guest]: mama and others got married from there. We studied in a school called the Air Force School,
[Guest]: which later became very historic because it had, you know, in the 60-62 war or something,
[Guest]: a bomb fell on one of the churches that was near the school. By that time, we had left.
[Guest]: We left at the end of 61. But we were very excited because we had no idea what war meant.
[Guest]: But we were very excited to learn that our school had been close to some danger point.
[Guest]: I also remember well the Janmashtami celebrations that used to be there around us. There was
[Guest]: an area called Lalkurti near to where we lived and there was a pond there. So we used to
[Guest]: all go off and buy those little mandirs and mitti and all that, although we are a Sikh
[Guest]: family. So there was not much prayer or anything of the Hindu kind. If we went anywhere, we
[Guest]: went to the gurdwaras. And we used to go a lot with my grandmother who took part in the
[Guest]: communal kitchen, the langar in the gurdwara. So we loved going with her and sitting with
[Guest]: her and making rotis on those big tawas, you know, 6-7 women used to sit and you could
[Guest]: make those rotis and then serving them to people. All that was part of our very sort
[Guest]: of open liberal childhood. We moved in 61. At the end of 61, we moved to Delhi. My father
[Guest]: followed Prem Bhatia, who used to be the editor of the Tribune and then moved to the Times
[Guest]: of India and called my dad from Delhi. So my dad came first and then we followed later.
[Guest]: And Delhi to me, I still remember the time 16th of December, I think 1961, when we arrived
[Guest]: and late night at New Delhi station or Delhi station, I forget which one it was. But I
[Guest]: was struck by the smallness of the spaces. You know, there were flats as opposed to large
[Guest]: sprawling houses. People didn't actually go out that much into the streets to play as
[Guest]: we used to. Of course, later when we became familiar with it, we realized that there were
[Guest]: spaces that we could find even at that time in Delhi. But it was quite a culture shock
[Guest]: for us to come from the wide open spaces of Punjab where you could eat gannas, where you
[Guest]: could drink ganne ka ras, where you could actually go anywhere in the city. And everyone
[Guest]: knew who you were. And so if by any chance you were lost somewhere, somebody went off
[Guest]: in the wrong direction, some shopkeeper would come and say, achha, aap Bhatia saab ke bachche
[Guest]: ho, and then they would find us and bring us back home. We used to go, we loved reading
[Guest]: and there was a shop, the English Book Depot in the market. And the owner of that shop
[Guest]: was a man who just thought somehow, thought that all kids were guests who could come for
[Guest]: free to his shop. So he had this, you know, those standees that spin the spinners of books
[Guest]: and comics and all of us would just hang around there sitting on the floor reading. We'd be
[Guest]: careful because he had taught us to be careful, but he always allowed all of us to read. And
[Guest]: we used to get a treat from my mother every two weeks after our reading when we would
[Guest]: be taken to the ice cream shop across the road, where we would each get a choc bar and
[Guest]: she would eat something else, I forget what, and the entire total bill would come to two
[Guest]: rupees and fifty paisa that time, or two rupees and eight annas, because we were also dealing
[Guest]: in annas at that time. So there were simple pleasures like that and all around us were
[Guest]: signs of partition, which I never at that time recognised. Now with hindsight, with
[Guest]: my interest in partition, I can see that, you know, Sialkot Saree House or Lahoriya
[Guest]: Di Hatti or Rawalpindi Chappals, etc, etc. All of these places must have been places
[Guest]: that refugees had recreated when they came back. So it was, I still remember it with
[Guest]: a lot of nostalgia. I have been back many times. Every time I go to Chandigarh, I try
[Guest]: to make a stop in Ambala. But of course, there are so many things now that we no longer recognise,
[Guest]: you know, it's changed so much, but still it retains some of that character.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that, you know, sort of interests me whenever I talk to my guests
[Amit Varma]: is the question of how we are shaped, how we become what we become. And a lot of that
[Amit Varma]: is in ways that are invisible or unseen to us at the time. But then when you look back
[Amit Varma]: with hindsight, you realise that, oh, this is how things were. You know, elsewhere, you've,
[Amit Varma]: for example, spoken about your mother and how she had to deal with, you know, your grandmother,
[Amit Varma]: who was conventional, who insisted that at mealtimes, men would be served first and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, saw your mom as a kind of an upstart. But in the way that you describe your mom,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that while there may not have been the language to articulate any kind of
[Amit Varma]: feminism or even a knowledge that such a thing existed, there was nevertheless a sort of
[Amit Varma]: lived feminism in terms of just sort of, you know, the constraints that you should not
[Amit Varma]: submit to, for example, you know, at one point, you've mentioned in this great interview,
[Amit Varma]: you've done with one of my recent guests, Nadanjana Roy, where you said, quote, my mother
[Amit Varma]: encouraged us to help ourselves. She said that there was no way her girls were going
[Amit Varma]: to eat less in her house. I didn't have a word for it. I didn't know the word feminism
[Amit Varma]: then. But I learned from my mother, but that there was nothing natural about discrimination,
[Amit Varma]: and that it had to be fought, stop quote. So I'd love for you to talk more about your
[Amit Varma]: mother, just looking back at, you know, how that shaped you. And also, you know, as you
[Amit Varma]: are growing up, you know, all the children are kind of going to school, they're playing
[Amit Varma]: outside and Humbala, you are, you know, sleeping under the imli tree. And there is that sense
[Amit Varma]: of freedom. But in all our lives in ways that are certainly invisible to men, and even I
[Amit Varma]: think girls normalise it, there is this sort of disjunction where boys do a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of thing and go in a certain kind of path and girls are supposed to go in the other
[Amit Varma]: kind of path and all of that. So as all this was happening around you, you know, is that
[Amit Varma]: something that you were aware of and resented? Or is it something that felt normal to you?
[Amit Varma]: And later on, you kind of began to see and I'm guessing your mom's attitudes would have
[Amit Varma]: had a lot to do with that. So I'd love you to talk a bit more about.
[Guest]: Yeah, in many ways, actually, both my parents, but my father in somewhat unusual ways and
[Guest]: in an indirect kind of way, but my mother, yes. So my mother, you know, she left Lahore
[Guest]: a little before partition to come and live in Delhi. And she was working here, living
[Guest]: in a hostel alone at a hostel that later. So Miranda House, before it actually became
[Guest]: a college, had a hostel called Miranda House. She lived there and she was there when partition
[Guest]: happened. And it was from there that she went back to Lahore twice to fetch the family that
[Guest]: was there. And one time she brought two younger siblings. And the next time when she went,
[Guest]: which I think was as late as July of 1947, to fetch her brother and her mother, the brother
[Guest]: who I've written about, Rana Mama, he refused to come and he refused to let my grandmother
[Guest]: come. And my mother then came back and had these two children with her. And she described,
[Guest]: you know, later when we started talking about partition, she described moments when she
[Guest]: remembers the partition violence in Delhi, in particular, one of the Muslim women who
[Guest]: lived in the hostel with her and whose parents, realizing what was happening, spirited her
[Guest]: away somewhere safe, but her possessions were all looted by people screaming out, coming
[Guest]: to the hostel, etc. So I think she learned from that time to be an independent person.
[Guest]: She and my father knew each other in Lahore and they wanted to marry. And he had promised
[Guest]: that he would come to Delhi and they would get married. So in the meanwhile, she was
[Guest]: living here waiting for him to come so that they could marry. And then, of course, partition
[Guest]: happened, but they did marry subsequently in Simla. And by this time, you know, she
[Guest]: had no father. Her father had died. Mother also was now in Pakistan. She was alone. She
[Guest]: had older sisters who were married and who didn't bother. And she had younger siblings
[Guest]: who she was looking after. She was very much an independent woman making her own decisions.
[Guest]: She knew she wanted to marry this man and she did. And my dad, on the contrary, was
[Guest]: somebody who wasn't as strong. You know, very often you find women really are able
[Guest]: to take their own decisions and men somehow are often much more vacillating. He was vacillating
[Guest]: and she, you know, later they told us lovely stories of how there was this one woman to
[Guest]: whom he was actually engaged and he didn't know how to say no to her. And then he told
[Guest]: my mom, I can't do it. And then she wrote a letter to this woman's father and all of
[Guest]: that. Anyway, they married in Simla, a simple wedding. My grandparents, at that time my
[Guest]: grandfather was alive, didn't like it. My grandfather was actually OK because when he
[Guest]: got to know my mother, he became very fond of her, but they had a very short time together.
[Guest]: My grandmother was the conventional Punjabi, you know, sass. And she didn't like that there
[Guest]: had been a love marriage. She didn't like that there was no other hate. She didn't like
[Guest]: that this woman did not necessarily kowtow to her all the time. So she discriminated
[Guest]: against her in all kinds of ways and tried and she lived with us for a long time and
[Guest]: tried to impose her will on her. My mother, to keep the peace, would do a little bit,
[Guest]: but there was a line she had drawn in her mind, you know, which she would not allow
[Guest]: my grandmother to cross. But she found her own ways around it. So one of the incidents
[Guest]: that I often talk about is because my grandmother would insist that the men are fed first. So
[Guest]: my father would be fed first, the two brothers after, then us and then my mom. And my mom
[Guest]: kind of refused to give in to this, insisted that everybody be fed together. But in the
[Guest]: early days, she would also tell us that, OK, if this is what's happening, then find your
[Guest]: own ways of, you know, subverting this. And one of the things that we used to do was that
[Guest]: my grandmother would always sleep in the afternoons and she slept very soundly. And she used to
[Guest]: wear a salwar, you know, those old fashioned salwars with huge nefas, where you put nadas
[Guest]: in them and lots of gathers and everything. So she used to wear those salwars and have
[Guest]: a nada on which she tied her keys. And so we would sneak up and untie the keys when
[Guest]: she was asleep. And then we would open the tin trunks that she had in which she kept
[Guest]: all the goodies like shakarparas and mathis and et cetera, et cetera. And we'd steal them,
[Guest]: gorge on them, be happy, retie the keys. And then when she woke up, she would know nothing.
[Guest]: But later she would find out. But it was all supported by my mom that you just do this
[Guest]: and do whatever you can. And as long as she doesn't find out, you're fine. And if she
[Guest]: finds out, I'll stand by you. So that was always there. And then, you know, one of the
[Guest]: incidents I remember very well, which for me was really an important moment in my life.
[Guest]: My father was working in the Times of India in the Tribune there. He used to play cards.
[Guest]: He was a gambler. You know, people don't often talk about their parents like that, but he
[Guest]: was a gambler and he was a real gambler in the sense that he played for money and he
[Guest]: almost always lost. So economically, our home was often in a very tight situation because
[Guest]: we couldn't rely on his income. And sometimes I remember this one occasion I've written
[Guest]: about it somewhere that waking up in the middle of the night and hearing my dad and a friend
[Guest]: of his called her bunts, you know, urgent tones talking to my mother. And they had come
[Guest]: from the club where they used to gamble and they'd run out of money and they'd come to
[Guest]: ask her for money. So this kind of thing often happened. And then she actually took us all
[Guest]: into confidence, even though we were quite young. And she said, look, don't judge your
[Guest]: father for this. It's it's like an illness and we have to learn to help him to deal with
[Guest]: it. And that made a huge difference to us. So we actually developed very interesting
[Guest]: tactics with my dad where we could talk to him about this, where every time he went gambling
[Guest]: and he stayed out late, we would fine him. So we fixed a fine of it was called DDR, dhai
[Guest]: dhai rupeya. And that was the top level of the fine. So if he came back at eight o'clock,
[Guest]: he'd have to pay us maybe one rupee each. If he came back another time, it would be
[Guest]: a little more. But if he stayed beyond midnight, then it was dhai dhai rupeya. And it was not
[Guest]: only for us, but anyone else who was in the house, any child who was in the house. And,
[Guest]: you know, at that time, cousins and siblings would be visiting. So we'd often have three
[Guest]: or four cousins staying with us. So we would have to dole out this money. So it kind of
[Guest]: became it sort of emerged from the silence in which it was and it became something we
[Guest]: could talk about. And in later years, my father remembers because he he gave that up, but,
[Guest]: you know, much later. But he did and then continued to play cards in a kind of recreational
[Guest]: way along with my mother, but not gambling, gambling as in gambling. But in some ways,
[Guest]: that strategy of hers also humanized him a great deal for us. He wasn't a very patriarchal
[Guest]: type of man in the traditional way. He didn't try to impose his will. And I think partly
[Guest]: that was because he was married to this strong woman who would counter it if she needed to,
[Guest]: but partly because he wasn't that kind of guy. So he became to us a very lovely, very
[Guest]: friendly, extremely vulnerable, very modest kind of chap. And we had a really nice relationship
[Guest]: with him. And, you know, for example, he and I used to drink whiskey together. He would
[Guest]: pitch up at my place and with a whiskey glass and not want to open his bottles, but mine
[Guest]: and his brother, my youngest chacha, would also do the same. So after my dad passed away,
[Guest]: my chacha and I celebrated, had a celebratory drink in his memory to remember that moment.
[Guest]: So all of that I attribute to my mother, what she taught us that you're not in any way inferior.
[Guest]: Don't allow yourself to be discriminated against. It is in your hands to resist it a lot. And
[Guest]: if you can't do, you know, straightforward resistance, find a way around it. And also
[Guest]: look for people who are your supporters. And in her life, there were so many examples.
[Guest]: My dad wanted to have a dozen children. You know, she had four of us in six years. She
[Guest]: must have been continually pregnant and she was working through that time. And when my
[Guest]: younger brother, the fourth child was born, my mom told the doctor, I'm not having anymore.
[Guest]: You tie my tubes now. And I don't care what the husband says. And the doctor did it. And
[Guest]: then she told my father. So she was really quite a woman that way. I sometimes think
[Guest]: she's a much stronger feminist than I was, because it came to her kind of instinctually
[Guest]: in many ways. So I do owe her a lot.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a lovely story about her empathy for your father's situation and talking of
[Amit Varma]: it as a problem that I can relate to in the sense that I was a professional poker player
[Amit Varma]: for a few years. That's a game of skill and I did well at it. But in the ecosystem around
[Amit Varma]: me, because poker is a game which is on the intersection of skill and gambling. And in
[Amit Varma]: that ecosystem around me, I found so many gambling addicts, who really in some cases,
[Amit Varma]: their lives were destroyed by what they did. And in a couple of cases, I tried to make
[Amit Varma]: interventions but failed, even though at a rational level, they knew that you know, this
[Amit Varma]: was an addiction and they couldn't help themselves. But they couldn't help themselves. It just
[Amit Varma]: was what it was. It's terribly tragic. And maybe had they had kids who, you know, tried
[Amit Varma]: out the DDR therapy, it might have sort of helped. You alluded earlier to how when you
[Amit Varma]: now look back at Ambala, and you think of the shop names, and there's Sialkot and Lahore
[Amit Varma]: and Rawalpindi and all of that, and you realize this new layer opens up, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: wasn't there at the time. And I wonder sometimes about the texture of our memories, that do
[Amit Varma]: they change with time as this added context comes on to the place. And this is perhaps
[Amit Varma]: in two ways. And one way is just when you talk about places and events and so on. And
[Amit Varma]: the other way could also be this deepening understanding of people better, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like I think many of us when we grow up, we see our parents in a certain way. And maybe
[Amit Varma]: we see them in a good light. And then later, we see them in a bad light. And then later,
[Amit Varma]: as time goes by, we begin to see them as human beings, not as parents, parents, and we kind
[Amit Varma]: of begin to see their situations and their conditions and how they became what they became.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm fascinated by this question of memory. I had an episode with Achal Malhotra also,
[Amit Varma]: who's also, you know, done work on partition. And one of the things I realized about memory
[Amit Varma]: while researching for that episode was that when the way the brain works, the first time
[Amit Varma]: we remember something, we are remembering what happened. The next time we are remembering
[Amit Varma]: the remembering, and so on down the line, till eventually you can have a sort of a Rashomon
[Amit Varma]: effect, where two people who experience the exact same thing can, you know, remember them
[Amit Varma]: completely differently. And for you, you know, how have you experienced this at both the
[Amit Varma]: personal level of your own memories, in terms of do you feel that your memories of childhood
[Amit Varma]: have been deepened, perhaps changed in some ways, with the context that you can now put
[Amit Varma]: that what was once a memory that would make you happy, now it's layered with something
[Amit Varma]: else or vice versa. And it just in terms of, you know, the people you've spoken to as well,
[Amit Varma]: and I'd like to talk much more about your book in detail later. But I mean, your partition
[Amit Varma]: work, the other side of silence, and so on. But just in terms of speaking to people about
[Amit Varma]: their memories, you've seen this process play out. And I think memory is not just a linear
[Amit Varma]: act that something happened in the past, but you and you remember it. But every time you
[Amit Varma]: remember it, you are kind of recreating it and it becomes a part of the present as well.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, you asked so many things there and difficult things. So let me start, Amit, by saying that
[Guest]: I think in a sense, all of us carry memories inside our heads. And our brains filter out
[Guest]: the things we either don't want to remember, or, or they embed them somewhere deeply. And
[Guest]: there may be an occasion on which that memory might surface and anything could trigger it.
[Guest]: An encounter with somebody from that moment, or looking at an object from that time, or
[Guest]: even reading a story about it, or some anything could trigger it. But I think a memory in
[Guest]: a sense becomes meaningful and catalyzes other memories in the process of talking and listening.
[Guest]: So if you are talking to me today about something, and I recall in answer to a question that
[Guest]: you have asked me in a moment from my childhood or something, I may not have thought about
[Guest]: that for the longest time, but your question sparks off something. And then that thought
[Guest]: stays in my head, even after we have stopped talking, and somehow more and more opens up.
[Guest]: And then the next time I'm having a conversation with somebody that more and more will enter
[Guest]: the picture. But I think it's also not only that, it's not only instrumental in that way
[Guest]: or incremental in that way. I think it is also that the person that I am changes all
[Guest]: the time, the person that you are changes all the time. And the way therefore you look
[Guest]: back on a certain memory also changes. So for me, for example, the fact that in Ambala
[Guest]: there were shops named after places in Pakistan, when I experienced those shops meant nothing
[Guest]: other than the fact that in Sialkot house my mother bought saris, in Jane soda water
[Guest]: factory we got nice milkshakes, things like that. It meant nothing else. But when I became
[Guest]: interested in partition and when I started researching partition and looking at it, suddenly
[Guest]: all those things acquired different meanings. And I realized that they must have been the
[Guest]: places that refugees set up when they came because they carried the memory of those places.
[Guest]: Now in my, I have seen so many such places. I'm just giving you a very mundane example.
[Guest]: When I went to, if you go to Amritsar and you go to the Golden Temple and you walk around
[Guest]: the bazaar, every second shop has, you know, whatever has a name from across the border.
[Guest]: Now suddenly when I went back to the Golden Temple, the first time I went there, I think
[Guest]: it was in 84 or before, before the Blue Star operation in 84. But after that, I've been
[Guest]: back many times and each time those places have acquired other meanings for me because
[Guest]: actually I'm thinking so much more about those histories, those moments. At some point I
[Guest]: started to look at the Muslim population of Amritsar and how all of them left and where
[Guest]: they used to live in the city. And the next time I went there, the walled city or the
[Guest]: old city, which is where the Muslim population lived, suddenly acquired other meanings for
[Guest]: me. So in a sense, I think memory also is something that is dynamic and you are quite
[Guest]: right. It's never linear because then other things open up, which will, it's a bit like,
[Guest]: so today I was reading a friend's translation of the Katha Saritsagar and it is like, you
[Guest]: start with one story and then it leads to another and another and another and somewhere
[Guest]: they're intertwined and somewhere they're each going off in their own directions. And
[Guest]: each time you read that story, it sparks off other stories in your head. So to me, it's
[Guest]: a little bit like that. I find it very, very, a very rich kind of history or the wrong word
[Guest]: I suppose, very rich seem to explore, I guess one could say. I'm continually fascinated
[Guest]: by it. And I also am very, very fascinated by the silences of memory because there are
[Guest]: things people remember. There are things they consciously put a lid on. And it's not that
[Guest]: that memory doesn't go away, but it's articulation is something that doesn't happen. And the
[Guest]: question I always have in my mind is, is that because it is unspeakable? Is that because
[Guest]: there is no vocabulary to describe it? Is it because there is a fear of what it can
[Guest]: unleash if you allow that memory to surface? And what are the kind of struggles that people
[Guest]: have with memory? So, for example, why is it that victims and survivors of sexual assault
[Guest]: during partition have found it so difficult to speak about it, have spoken so little about
[Guest]: it? It's everywhere. The knowledge about it is everywhere. And the silence about it is
[Guest]: everywhere. And the people, the women who have lived through it, surely this is not
[Guest]: something they've wiped out of their memory. For me, that too, the struggle and the need
[Guest]: to uncover these silences, and yet the awareness of what the consequences could be, this is
[Guest]: all part of the whole engagement with memory, if you like. I don't know if I make sense.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, you've sparked off so many thoughts in me. And there's this lovely quote by Krishna
[Amit Varma]: Swapti, which you've written about also, where you've in the context of partition, where
[Amit Varma]: she says, quote, partition was difficult to forget, but dangerous to remember, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And when I read this, it struck me that this is not just true in terms of partition itself
[Amit Varma]: and what happened there. It's true in a lot of women's lives. Like I was having this,
[Amit Varma]: I was part of this WhatsApp conversation a couple of days ago with a group of friends
[Amit Varma]: who were talking about how safe are their kids in school, and so on and so forth. And
[Amit Varma]: at one point, one of my friends who's a mother herself said that, listen, here's a reality
[Amit Varma]: that in my generation, before the age of 12, every woman I know was at some point assaulted
[Amit Varma]: or abused in some way or the other. And it's just there, right. And this is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: something that is perhaps unseen to the men around them. But it's there, you know, like
[Amit Varma]: Soptyji said about partition, it's difficult to forget, but dangerous to remember. And
[Amit Varma]: what like one, what would, how would you react to that observation? And two, when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to dealing with memory in this way, where you suppress certain things, but you can't
[Amit Varma]: get away from there, those as well, what are the consequences of coming to terms with it?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the consequences of suppressing those memories? Like, does it free you up
[Amit Varma]: to be able to share those memories, like so many people did with you? Does it free you
[Amit Varma]: up? Or perhaps, do you have to then relive that trauma, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, I think that's an assumption that I made when I started doing my research.
[Guest]: And even before that, when I did some work with civil liberties organizations on doing
[Guest]: investigations into things like the Bhagalpur violence, and the 1984 violence, and so on.
[Guest]: And my assumption, for example, as a feminist, when I went into doing research on Bhagalpur,
[Guest]: was that there had been sexual violence, and that women had kind of suppressed this. And
[Guest]: in talking to the women, and helping them to open up about it, I would be doing a service
[Guest]: of some kind that it would, in a sense, free speech, liberate the person, perhaps help
[Guest]: them to deal with it. Actually, nothing could have been further from the truth. And I realized
[Guest]: that not only in the reactions that I got from women in Bhagalpur, but also in subsequent
[Guest]: work. And I think the question that you asked that, you know, what are the consequences
[Guest]: of it? Actually, Amit, we don't know. And the consequences can be really, really serious.
[Guest]: And I think that is a real ethical dilemma for those of us who work with people's lives
[Guest]: and work with people on the stories of their lives, and also work with memory. So I'll
[Guest]: give you an example, or a couple of examples. You know, once I was talking to a young woman,
[Guest]: and she was very traumatized. And she told me, she had been part of a research project
[Guest]: on partition. And she told me that she had been assigned an interview with a gentleman,
[Guest]: a Sikh gentleman, who was a doctor at the time of partition, and he was in charge of
[Guest]: a particular hospital. And that she had been told that he has some very traumatic stories,
[Guest]: and you must try to get them out of him. So she kept pushing, asking him these questions.
[Guest]: And she kept meeting resistance, both from him and his wife. And she couldn't understand
[Guest]: why the wife was so resentful, and angry and so on. And eventually, one day, he told the
[Guest]: interviewer this story of how he had been in charge of a hospital, and how the hospital
[Guest]: came under attack, and the nurses and others had locked themselves up in the room. And
[Guest]: they begged him to kill them, as happened, you know, in many instances. And he did, not
[Guest]: all of them, but I think he killed some of them. Now, then, having surfaced that memory,
[Guest]: you know, he was in a real state. His wife was furious with this young woman. The young
[Guest]: woman was frightened because she didn't know what she had unleashed. And she left never
[Guest]: to return. Now, what can you do? So, you know, the excavation of memory, I think, isn't a
[Guest]: simple task that you can do with the simple assumption that, yeah, it's been submerged,
[Guest]: and it must come out, and everything will be wonderful, and people will be able to deal
[Guest]: with their lives after that. No, it's not that. There are consequences to the life of
[Guest]: the person. And you have to ask yourself the question as a researcher, that what is my
[Guest]: ethical responsibility here? To whom am I responsible? To some abstract truths that,
[Guest]: yeah, I've explored memory, and I've revealed this, or to the life of that person? And similarly,
[Guest]: for example, I still have this dilemma, and I haven't figured out what to do with it.
[Guest]: One of the things was that during my work on partition, I found completely by accident,
[Guest]: this book, I've referred to it a couple of times, in a secondhand bookstore in Delhi.
[Guest]: And I bought it, eventually. In the first instance, I didn't, and then I went back and
[Guest]: bought it. And it is not a book, book as in a published book, but it was a publication
[Guest]: of the Ministry of, I think, External Affairs or Rehabilitation, I forget what at the time
[Guest]: of partition. And it is a district by district listing of women and children who were abducted,
[Guest]: possibly raped. And it gives you the name, the place, the age of the person, her background,
[Guest]: which family she belonged to, and the possible name of the abductor, the person she was last
[Guest]: seen with. Now, you can deduce a lot from that book. But one of the great temptations
[Guest]: as a researcher was to put that material on the net, and to see how many stories it would
[Guest]: reveal. But it's been 25 years, I haven't done it. I know that there is one other copy
[Guest]: of this book, which is in the Central Secretariat Library. So it's not that it's not a public
[Guest]: document. But nobody in the CSEC library is going to put it out. But a researcher like
[Guest]: me might put it out. Now, what about the families of those women? Often they don't know that
[Guest]: the mother or grandmother, whoever that person is, has lived through sexual assault. How
[Guest]: will they deal with that knowledge? Can I really do it in the pursuit of some truth?
[Guest]: And I haven't been able to bring myself to do it. So in the same way, I think the women
[Guest]: in there, suppose I was to find them, I think they would choose silence over speech. And
[Guest]: as somebody exploring memory, I would have to respect that choice. So I think it raises
[Guest]: a lot of questions about what is ethical practice? What is the purpose of our research? What
[Guest]: is truth? What is silence? All of these things come up in connection with the exploration
[Guest]: of memory. And yet, I do believe that in some ways, opening up memory and making space for
[Guest]: remembrance is also part of the battle for justice and recognition and acknowledgement
[Guest]: of what people lived through. So in some way, you have to strike a balance. People have
[Guest]: to know that this happened, that this happened to people like us. It happened to everybody.
[Guest]: You know, and real names, real people. It's like in Berlin, when you're walking in that
[Guest]: city, you see those little copper plaques on the pavement, and you can never be away
[Guest]: from that history. So somewhere we need something to remind us that this is a history that we
[Guest]: have to learn from, and it involved real people. And to remember those people is to give them
[Guest]: the justice that they were denied, to give them the recognition that they were denied
[Guest]: in their lives. Again, I don't know if I make sense.
[Amit Varma]: No, you make a lot of sense. A lot of threads I want to sort of explore from here. There's
[Amit Varma]: a Twitter account which actually does this job of, I'll link it from the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: I can't remember the name, which does a job of humanising victims of the Holocaust, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so each thread will be a story of a person with a photograph, if there is one,
[Amit Varma]: and immediately, it's not a number, it's not a statistic, it's an actual person. And that
[Amit Varma]: I think is beautiful and important. I'd done an episode a few months back with the writer
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh Kumar. And he told me about how when he was examining communal riots and reporting
[Amit Varma]: on them in a particular part of the heartland, he went to this village where seven years
[Amit Varma]: ago, there had been communal violence and Hindus from outside had come. And there was
[Amit Varma]: a small conclave of Muslims in the village. And they basically killed everybody, except
[Amit Varma]: one guy who managed to run away and hide in the fields. And but when he eventually when
[Amit Varma]: it was over, he saw that all his fellow Muslims were dead. And among the bodies were those
[Amit Varma]: of his wife and his children and all that. So you'd imagine that that person's life is
[Amit Varma]: completely destroyed, and it's over. And then Amitabh goes to that village and comes across
[Amit Varma]: this man. And he is now living with another wife and with a couple of other kids. And
[Amit Varma]: everything is completely normal. There is no, you know, it's as if it never happened.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads me to thinking about how important a part of this process of healing is denial.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes you can say that, you know, let's put it out in the open and come to terms with
[Amit Varma]: it. But at an individual level, how do you live? Sometimes the only way you live is by
[Amit Varma]: denial. You have this lovely passage, I'll quote from your book, where you write, the
[Amit Varma]: history of partition was also the history of widespread sexual violence, particularly
[Amit Varma]: rape, abduction, forced marriage, selling into prostitution, and estimated 100,000 women
[Amit Varma]: in both countries are believed to have suffered this fate. For many of them, the history of
[Amit Varma]: sexual violation became more complex as time went on. For in many cases, the men who had
[Amit Varma]: abducted them ended up marrying them. And because of this, because they were now in
[Amit Varma]: relationships with men of the other religion, they became absences in their family absences
[Amit Varma]: that also led in many ways to an absence of memory. For these women's families, once a
[Amit Varma]: woman had gone over to the other side, you put that in quotes, no matter that this was
[Amit Varma]: not a journey they undertook voluntarily, they cease to exist. Most families that lost
[Amit Varma]: female members to rape and or abduction never mentioned them again. So for those of us involved
[Amit Varma]: in memory work, here's a question, how do you remember that which does not exist, or
[Amit Varma]: whose existence is not even acknowledged? How do you force memory? Or where do you arrest
[Amit Varma]: it? Stop quote, you know, and another sort of facet of this denial, which I found very
[Amit Varma]: moving was when you speak about how some people what they have gone through, they do not have
[Amit Varma]: a language to even express it. So you point out this story, which a friend of yours recounted
[Amit Varma]: of a grandmother who was displaced by partition, who would just stay in the attic all day.
[Amit Varma]: And she wouldn't speak in a normal language. She just babble all day in just some imaginary
[Amit Varma]: language. And you write quote, as children, my friend and her siblings were impatient
[Amit Varma]: and scornful of the old woman. As adults, they realized that this recourse to babble
[Amit Varma]: was the only language she had to deal with the trauma of separation. Stop quote. And
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't know if this is leading to a question, but you were talking about memory.
[Amit Varma]: And I remembered, you know, that incident Amitabha told me about and perhaps the importance
[Amit Varma]: of denial, and perhaps and also the sense that in many small ways, in our lives, which
[Amit Varma]: have not experienced anywhere near that kind of trauma, that all of us, you know, everybody
[Amit Varma]: listening also, maybe there are things we choose not to remember, maybe there are things
[Amit Varma]: about us, you know, things that we might have thought or done or so on and so forth. So
[Amit Varma]: I know this is a bit rambly, but you know, what would your responses be to this?
[Guest]: So you're quite right to say that there are things we choose not to remember. And I'll
[Guest]: go back to that point, which you made when you said you were talking to this group of
[Guest]: parents. And one of the people there said that in our generation, in her generation,
[Guest]: women routinely faced sexual violence and didn't really talk about it. So the interesting
[Guest]: thing is that, of course, all of us have faced it in our lives. I have so many people, so
[Guest]: many women, I know all of us have. And we have not spoken about it. But in a sense,
[Guest]: it doesn't, the memory never goes away. I was thinking the other day, you know, often
[Guest]: when I think back to my childhood, somehow the two or three moments of sexual assault
[Guest]: that I faced at the hands of neighbors or whatever, they always crop up. I don't know
[Guest]: how or why other things get wiped out. Some things come back. But these things remain
[Guest]: constant. I was talking to a historian friend of mine the other day. She's quite a well-known
[Guest]: historian. And she was talking to me about her childhood. And once again, she spoke of
[Guest]: a moment in her childhood that remained really sharp and clear. And that was the moment that
[Guest]: she was sexually assaulted. And I was thinking to myself how this doesn't go away. So I think
[Guest]: at one level, that is true that this memory kind of just stays. But it's also true that
[Guest]: we don't have the vocabulary to speak about it. We don't even speak about sex, you know.
[Guest]: So how to talk about sexual violation? Where do you get the words to talk about it? Our
[Guest]: literature doesn't give us any possibility because our writers also don't really know
[Guest]: how to write sex. So in a sense, it's not normalized in our lives. So we don't have
[Guest]: the vocabulary to talk about it. Also, talking can only happen when you are talking to somebody.
[Guest]: You know, memory becomes meaningful in the telling of it, in many ways, and the receiving
[Guest]: of it. So if you don't have that, then it becomes really difficult. This is why in the
[Guest]: women's movement, in the early days, when women of my generation came into feminism,
[Guest]: one of the most important things for us was to sit together and talk about our lives,
[Guest]: about our feelings. And I still remember the hesitation with which we started to talk about
[Guest]: our bodies because we were hesitant, even married women, for example, having faced domestic
[Guest]: violence, were hesitant even to speak about that in public because they had always been
[Guest]: taught that this is not a public thing. This is a private matter. So how to speak about
[Guest]: it in public? And that articulation started in a very hesitant way. How then to articulate
[Guest]: something that lies much deeper? Where do you find the words? How do you talk about
[Guest]: it? How do you know you can trust these people? So a lot of women's groups in these listening
[Guest]: groups built trust with each other by saying, OK, I'm asking you to tell your story, but
[Guest]: I will tell you my story as well so that I too am vulnerable. And that was also a learning
[Guest]: experience for us middle class women, because even though we thought of ourselves as feminists,
[Guest]: et cetera, we went into this thinking, not consciously, but suddenly somewhere in our
[Guest]: heads that we don't face any problems. The problems are out there. And we had to learn
[Guest]: to recognize that actually they're in our lives and in our things, in our families as
[Guest]: well. So in a sense, the difficulty of speech and articulation about issues that lie so
[Guest]: deep and for issues for which we don't have words is what impacts a lot of women.
[Guest]: Then I want to go back to your other point that you were making about healing and forgetting
[Guest]: or not talking about it or silence be a way of healing. I think people come to healing
[Guest]: in different ways. And I think one can't generalize that silence can heal or speech can heal.
[Guest]: And I want to tell you a story here of somebody who got in touch with me. So I think several
[Guest]: years ago now, maybe seven or eight years back, just out of the blue, I got an email
[Guest]: from a man in Canada or in America. And he wrote to me to say that, look, somebody gave
[Guest]: me your name. I'm trying to find out my history post-partition. He was a 10 month old infant
[Guest]: at the time. And he and his entire extended family were escaping from what became Pakistan
[Guest]: to what became India. So they were his father's side of the family and his mother's side of
[Guest]: the family. And somewhere close to the Amritsar, the Wagah border, the men, three men were
[Guest]: sent off to look for what could be an easier crossing. And those three men were attacked.
[Guest]: They went off separately. And it was assumed that they died because they never came back
[Guest]: to the kafila that was going. It wasn't a big kafila, just never came back to the group
[Guest]: that was going. So then this group was attacked and pretty much everybody in it was killed.
[Guest]: This young infant was also left for dead. He was hit on the neck with a machete and
[Guest]: the shoulder and thrown on the ground. And then the attackers went away. And then it
[Guest]: turned out that a 16 year old boy, who was his uncle, had escaped the attack by hiding
[Guest]: in the bushes. So it's a bit like the Amitabh story. And then that boy got out and he saw
[Guest]: this infant was alive. So he took off his pug and he wrapped up the infant in that and
[Guest]: walked across the border to Amritsar and took him to a hospital and where the child was
[Guest]: looked after. A couple of months later, his mamas, who lived in Amritsar, and which is
[Guest]: where the entire family was going to, found him in the hospital and took him home. They
[Guest]: adopted him and they made him their son, their fourth son. But he had a different name, Sikh
[Guest]: names. So the other three, I think, were called Rajinder, Tejinder and something. And he was
[Guest]: called Rashwal. So he often got asked by people, how come you have a different name? And he
[Guest]: had no answer to that. And what he remembers is that when he was 10 years old, a man came
[Guest]: to visit and that man took him aside and said, do you know who I am? And he said, no, who
[Guest]: are you? And the man said, I'm your father. So this child was a bit shaken and he went
[Guest]: off to his father, his adoptive father and said, this is what he's saying, who is he?
[Guest]: And they told him, no, no, he's nobody and he'll never come back again. And that man
[Guest]: was sent packing. Now, it was his real father who had actually escaped the attack. And when
[Guest]: he came, by the time he came back, he found everybody had been killed. So he took another
[Guest]: route and he crossed the border and came and then he settled down in Gurdaspur, which is
[Guest]: two hours away from Amritsar. Now, Rashwal grew up without knowing this history and he
[Guest]: came across it when he moved to the States and became a professor there, married, had
[Guest]: children of his own. One day he got a phone call from Gurdaspur saying, your father has
[Guest]: died and left you all this property. We want you to come back. And he was really shaken
[Guest]: and his father-in-law, who was with him, then told him his story. And then retrospectively,
[Guest]: he felt a real sense of betrayal that his adoptive parents had never told him this story,
[Guest]: that he didn't know who his father was. And he was angry, felt betrayal, and he was psychologically
[Guest]: deeply troubled. But he wanted, basically, somehow to find out more about where this
[Guest]: incident happened, what happened. So that's when he wrote to me saying, can you help me?
[Guest]: And of course, there are no records, so I couldn't really help him. But what I did do
[Guest]: was that I went to Gurdaspur and I found his father's family. And from them, I was able
[Guest]: to recover some of the story. And then we were able to find out that one of his aunts
[Guest]: who had been alive at the time of the attack was in Canada. And so he met her and he got
[Guest]: a little more of the story. So for him, the healing was now putting the pieces of this
[Guest]: jigsaw together. And then the last stage in that was he wanted to go to Pakistan and see
[Guest]: that place where it had happened. And of course, he couldn't. How could he get a visa? But
[Guest]: amazingly, he persisted for three, four, five years, I think. Finally, he got a visa and
[Guest]: he went there. And after that, he felt somehow he could put this history at rest. But by
[Guest]: that time, his own family had kind of, you know, scattered or because they also had to
[Guest]: bear the brunt of this, this thing. So I think that process of healing can sometimes be really
[Guest]: complex. And it can't be that you just tell your story to somebody and that's it, you're
[Amit Varma]: warning.
[Amit Varma]: I read about the story of Rashpal in your book, and it's, it's very moving. And it also
[Amit Varma]: kind of makes you wonder because at a rational level, he must have known that there is no
[Amit Varma]: point going down these tracks into the past, like what are you going to gain? You know,
[Amit Varma]: you never knew that person is over, you know, there's nothing you can really do. But I can
[Amit Varma]: understand that pull, nevertheless, sort of going back to the question of healing and
[Amit Varma]: the fact that all women experience something and men never get it, or men never realize
[Amit Varma]: it most of the time, right? Because it's just an extra layer, an extra burden that women
[Amit Varma]: carry with them. And I'm just thinking aloud here, but it seems that therefore, it would
[Amit Varma]: be natural for this to create a reservoir of anger in women. And I'm guessing that one
[Amit Varma]: way to deal with the anger would be to be in denial, and to normalize whatever happened,
[Amit Varma]: to fit within the patriarchal system, and perhaps to perpetuate that patriarchy in your
[Amit Varma]: own way, as perhaps your grandmother was doing when she said the men eat first. And the other
[Amit Varma]: way would be to, you know, live the life of a lived feminist like your mother did, even
[Amit Varma]: if you're not actually an activist or doing the kind of things you've done through through
[Amit Varma]: your life. But even if not that, you sort of at least cast those aside and you live
[Amit Varma]: with the kind of freedom. But what I wonder about is that, is there that reservoir of
[Amit Varma]: anger? And where does it go? You know, if things like this had happened to me, I don't
[Amit Varma]: think it would have gone, I think some of that anger would have shaped me, and perhaps
[Amit Varma]: shaped me in unpleasant, ugly ways. But we don't, you know, when you look around you,
[Amit Varma]: the world seems like normal, and it isn't there. And, you know, but beneath the surfaces,
[Amit Varma]: what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: Well, I think, I don't think the anger ever goes away. But I think that many women sublimated,
[Guest]: they put it aside, because they know that the only route to survival is to live within
[Guest]: the system. And some choose to try and subvert the system from within in whatever possible
[Guest]: way they can. So that's what somebody like my mother was doing, you know, she was making
[Guest]: her own subversions within the system in which she lived, but she continued to live inside
[Guest]: her marriage, and to look after her mother-in-law and all of that. Which is why, of course,
[Guest]: many feminists, many women who call themselves feminists, are in marriages, and they know
[Guest]: it, the marriage is a patriarchal structure, they know they'll have to make many compromises.
[Guest]: But they also know that the complexity of being inside a patriarchal structure, where
[Guest]: often the perpetrators of that patriarchy are people that you love. So what do you do?
[Guest]: You don't, you know, you can't reject them, and you can't, and you don't want to reject
[Guest]: them because you care for them. So you make your compromises, and you choose what is it
[Guest]: that you can wipe out and forget, and what is it that's important enough to perhaps address.
[Guest]: But the choice is not entirely a free choice either, because you know also the limits.
[Guest]: You know that you are living in a system where there is no state support, there are no structures,
[Guest]: there is nothing that will give you the support and house you or allow you to make your own
[Guest]: life, were you to walk out of that patriarchal structure.
[Guest]: So then there is, you know, there's home and family, but for home and family you have gone,
[Guest]: and there's your new home and family, that's all you have. And that's complicated by the
[Guest]: fact that the new home and family may be a site of violence, but may also be a site of
[Guest]: love and care, and then there's nothing else outside the new home and family that's going
[Guest]: to provide you that same support.
[Guest]: So you make your choices, and you live with them. And I think that when you become a feminist,
[Guest]: for example, you acknowledge that anger, that resignation, that constant, I was talking
[Guest]: to two of my young male friends yesterday, and I was saying to them, you know, you don't
[Guest]: see it, but that constant sense of being discriminated against, of being invisibilized in so many
[Guest]: ways. I mean, I was saying to them, think of the simplest thing, think of technology.
[Guest]: So I teach, I teach at a few universities. I started teaching at Ashoka University some
[Guest]: years ago. I have 100 students in my class. I have to wear a mic. That mic is not made
[Guest]: for my clothing. It's made for male clothing. It's made for somebody who's wearing a suit
[Guest]: who can pin it on the lapel, who has a pocket. I don't have any of those things. Every time
[Guest]: I hold that mic in my hand, I feel this sense of anger that why does technology only take
[Guest]: the male body as a norm? So this is just a very small example. You see, you face it all
[Guest]: the time, every day. And, you know, you make a choice, whether it's a conscious choice
[Guest]: or not. If you allow that anger to corrode you constantly from within, then you're going
[Guest]: to be deeply unhappy. So you make a choice and say, OK, you know, these things, OK, I'll
[Guest]: just wipe out and I will focus on the real issue. So women of my generation, when we
[Guest]: faced sexual assault or harassment or something, we just let it slide. We kept quiet about
[Guest]: it. Now, partly it was because we had no structures where we could actually articulate it, explain
[Guest]: it, talk to anybody. So we knew that nothing was going to come of it. But partly it was
[Guest]: also because we made a choice and we thought, OK, leave this aside. Today, young feminists
[Guest]: find that very, very shocking because their anger is so strong and they don't want to
[Guest]: even bear one minute of it. And they feel that the older generations kind of compromised
[Guest]: us by allowing this to happen. And it's true, of course, to some extent. So I don't know
[Guest]: that anger, you know, women have to deal with it and they do. They find different ways of
[Guest]: dealing with it. But sometimes you'll find women getting possessed. That's also a way
[Guest]: of dealing with the unexpressed emotions that at least you can have a little freedom to
[Guest]: do what you like.
[Amit Varma]: When you talk about the dilemma of living in homes, which are the site of violence,
[Amit Varma]: but which are also the site of love, I'm reminded of Bell Hooks writing about how much she loved
[Amit Varma]: her father and how much, you know, it's not just about anger and hatred. That dilemma
[Amit Varma]: is there. These are still the men you love. So what do you do and where do you go from
[Amit Varma]: there, which is such an everyday thing. And you mentioned that, Leopold, Mike, and the
[Amit Varma]: metaphor I like to use is that of air conditioning, that, you know, air conditioning in most offices,
[Amit Varma]: you know, began in the 1950s. And there were only men in offices. So it was set at a particular
[Amit Varma]: temperature. And the point is that at that temperature, women's bodies just feel cold,
[Amit Varma]: you know, their optimal temperature is a little higher. And yet air conditioning temperature
[Amit Varma]: has kind of remained like that, because world designed by men for men, and so on and so
[Guest]: forth.
[Guest]: I mean, I face it every day when I drive my car. And I bought a new car three years ago.
[Guest]: And I searched, I'm short, right? So I need some thing that allows me to push the seat
[Guest]: forward to reach the pedals. And I searched and searched for a car where my knees did
[Guest]: not come up against the dashboard. But it was difficult. So finally, I chose the one
[Guest]: where they came up least against the dashboard, you know, but it's just not made thinking
[Guest]: of, you know, five foot nothing or five foot two, which is the average height of the Indian
[Guest]: woman. Okay, can we make a car that allows for that? No, we make a car that allows for
[Guest]: five, eight, five, nine, or something like that. And you have to just make do.
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, I mean, pockets, being another sort of example of that. And we are actually
[Amit Varma]: recording just a day after the Supreme Court judgment in the US and bro versus Wade, which
[Amit Varma]: essentially says that women don't own their own bodies, in a manner of speaking. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, this should sort of lead to a sense of rage among everybody, I guess. But it also
[Amit Varma]: shows you that besides gender, there are all these other factors playing into the game
[Amit Varma]: like ideology and religion and all of that, that so many women will actually support the
[Amit Varma]: decision, you know, and that kind of complicates it.
[Guest]: Many women will actually support the decision. Yeah, that's right. Because if you're quite
[Guest]: right, it's playing into religious sentiments. And actually, that reminds me of something
[Guest]: that you mentioned, that I wanted to go back to when you said that, what do you do with
[Guest]: this anger? So that is also why, you know, because there is so much anger at the discrimination,
[Guest]: continuous discrimination that you face, but also why you see this phenomenon that everybody
[Guest]: talks about, where they say, why is the mother-in-law harassing the daughter-in-law? Because once
[Guest]: she gets some power, who is she going to take it out on, except the most vulnerable person?
[Guest]: And you know, putting aside the fact that she has lived through this herself, she'll
[Guest]: take it out on the daughter-in-law. And that is where it comes from. But I don't know,
[Guest]: it's a bit tragic that, but yeah, you're right about Roe versus Wade. I mean, the overturning
[Guest]: of Roe is, it's just something that seems so unlikely to happen in this day and age,
[Guest]: right? And with the majority of judges saying, upturning it. But I read a very, very interesting
[Guest]: piece in the New Yorker, which talked about how in the U.S. at least, much of abortion
[Guest]: is today medical abortion through pills that you can take, and are raising the question
[Guest]: about whether this will impact that or not. And that what will happen is that the surveillance
[Guest]: state will now become much stronger because the medical data, your medical prescriptions,
[Guest]: what you're buying, et cetera, et cetera, those are trackable. So they can track if
[Guest]: you're buying these medicines. And there are some possibilities for women to go into the
[Guest]: next state and purchase them. But even now they're putting in place things which can
[Guest]: also track that. So it not only impacts, it's not only about the woman's control over her
[Guest]: own body, but it is also about her life. Because you're making the assumption that she has
[Guest]: to carry that fetus to term. She has to give birth to it. She has to look after it. She
[Guest]: has to have the money to look after it. She has to put aside the next 20, 25 years of
[Guest]: her life. You're making a decision on that without taking the woman into account. I find
[Guest]: that really shocking and disgusting. And I hope that things like that don't rub off in
[Amit Varma]: this country, but who knows? I mean, that, you know, like you said that you didn't expect
[Amit Varma]: it to happen and neither did I, because, you know, one is sort of imagines that the longer
[Amit Varma]: arc of history goes towards justice or freedom or whatever, but it goes towards a better
[Amit Varma]: place. And there might be ebbs and flows. There might be the rise of authoritarianism
[Amit Varma]: in some countries, but overall, it's fine. The battles we've won, they're not going to
[Amit Varma]: suddenly be turned back. Do you have that same sort of optimism? And I've had different
[Amit Varma]: guests on the show, expressing, you know, different views on this. So I think by and
[Amit Varma]: large, they're optimistic on the long arc. But what's your sense of this? Does it make
[Amit Varma]: you reconsider whether the long arc may actually be going towards a good place? Or were we
[Amit Varma]: constructing a long arc based on a small sample size?
[Guest]: I think a bit of both. I wouldn't say that we were constructing a long arc based on a
[Guest]: small sample size. I would say that we were constructing a long arc based on hope. And
[Guest]: I think hope is much more widespread than we kind of acknowledge. So if you are just
[Guest]: looking at women's rights and legislation on women, etc. And if you look at the long
[Guest]: arc, I think that the ways in which there has been a marked improvement in legislation,
[Guest]: and you can argue that it's not implemented on the ground, all of that is true. But this
[Guest]: improvement which has come about, not on its own, not with the state suddenly saying how
[Guest]: we'll do good laws, etc. But through women and women's movements pushing for it, it's
[Guest]: beneficial to a much wider group than the group that's pushing for it. So it's unlikely
[Guest]: to go back, at least that's the hope that we start with, and unlikely to face opposition.
[Guest]: If it didn't face opposition when it was happening, it's not likely to. I mean, if you take a
[Guest]: concrete example, if you look at the 1992 constitutional amendments on Panchayati Raj
[Guest]: and the reservation of seats for women, there wasn't much hope when it happened, there was
[Guest]: a lot of scepticism, but there wasn't huge opposition either. Because nobody thought,
[Guest]: especially our politicians, that it was in any way significant because it applied to
[Guest]: poor women, village women, you know. So as long as it's not coming in Parliament, what
[Guest]: are they bothered about? But actually, it has been one of the most significant changes.
[Guest]: And from a 33% reservation, we are now up to 50% in many places. We have nearly half
[Guest]: the elected posts now are with women, so 1.4 million out of 3 or something. And everywhere,
[Guest]: I mean, not everywhere, but let's say even if half of that, there's scepticism that they
[Guest]: are panchayat patis and all of that. And that's not untrue. There'll always be some falsification
[Guest]: and something going wrong with any change. But the other half have done fantastic work.
[Guest]: So in many ways, it's tough to kill that hope. And I have always held that where women's
[Guest]: rights are concerned, it's going to be difficult for us to move back in this country, that
[Guest]: maybe we won't go ahead too much. But to go back will be difficult. But now I don't know,
[Guest]: you know, if you can have something like Roe and Wade going back so much, maybe it's these
[Guest]: kind of things can also happen here. So it's difficult to know whether to be hopeful of
[Guest]: that long arc. But actually, it's also not possible to be anything else. You have to
[Guest]: at least retain some of that hope and see if things shape up that way.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to an earlier point in the long arc as it were, the long arc of this conversation
[Amit Varma]: and continue talking about your life. Let's sort of go back to your childhood and tell
[Amit Varma]: me about sort of the other influences that shaped you in the sense that today we assume
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, you have the internet available to you, all the knowledge in the world is
[Amit Varma]: available to you, you can do whatever, watch whatever, read whatever, listen to whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And that of course, wasn't the case. And often, you know, for people of my vintage or older,
[Amit Varma]: what you had was, you know, was going to shape you in some way, it was all that there was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you read whatever you could get your hands on, you watch whatever you could
[Amit Varma]: watch, so on and so forth. So tell me a little bit about sort of growing up, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: was the scene in terms of what were the books that were around that you were allowed to
[Amit Varma]: read at in some place, I think you've described your family as an atheist Punjabi family.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm fascinated by that as well about, you know, because like 1950s is a pretty early
[Amit Varma]: time for a family to be atheist and to identify as such. So I'd love to know more about that
[Amit Varma]: as well. So tell me a bit about all of those influences, intellectual artistic, what's
[Guest]: going on there.
[Guest]: So religion was never a big thing in our house. And when I say atheist, I mean that I never
[Guest]: saw my mother or my father go into a religious institution into a temple or into a Gurdwara,
[Guest]: yes, at some point, but not that much really. So we, you know, whenever Diwali or festivals
[Guest]: were celebrated, the puja part of it was didn't happen because it just didn't happen, you
[Guest]: know, we didn't even know what the rituals were or anything like that. So it wasn't as
[Guest]: if my parents said we don't believe in God, but there was no God-like ritual or God-like
[Guest]: image or anybody floating around. We had, as people often do, a picture of Guru Nanak
[Guest]: and that was taken out whenever my grandmother came to live with us in Ambala, she lived
[Guest]: with us. And then when we moved to Delhi, she started this thing of living with each
[Guest]: of her sons for two or three months at a time. So then we used to bring out the Guru Nanak
[Guest]: picture and keep it there as a place for her to pray. We still had, we had the Guru Granth
[Guest]: Sahib in the house, but it was never read. It was a book that was just kept away. And
[Guest]: the only time I remember my father actually praying or wanting to pray or anything like
[Guest]: that was when he was going to gamble and he wanted to win. So he would then go to the
[Guest]: Gurdwara beforehand or something. And I remember that once I went somewhere to speak, do a
[Guest]: talk or something. And at the end of the talk, they gave me this large wooden Ganesh flat
[Guest]: at the back, which you could hang up on a wall. And I didn't know what to do with it.
[Guest]: So I thought I'll give it away to somebody. And my dad said, no, no, give it to me. And
[Guest]: I said, what will you do with it? So he took it and he put it in the staircase, stairwell
[Guest]: of their house. And he said, no, every time I go to the club, no, I'll just ask him to
[Guest]: give me some money. So in a sense, there was a kind of healthy disrespect also. But of
[Guest]: course, when my parents passed away and my mom, my father died earlier than my mom died
[Guest]: about 10 years after that, we did have a religious ceremony, but we basically had the Sikh ceremony
[Guest]: because it's much the simplest one. And that's they had not expressed any desire to not have
[Guest]: any religious thing. So we did the basic thing for them. But we also subverted it. When my
[Guest]: dad died, I was determined that like my brothers, I would also light the fire under his body.
[Guest]: And the pundit was very, you know, we took him to the cremation ground and the ragi was
[Guest]: there and the pundit was there and the pundit was very upset. And he said, no, no, girls
[Guest]: can't do it, etc. And I said to him, nothing doing. You know, it's my father, not yours.
[Guest]: I'm going to do it. So I did. And I actually called my sister and my two sisters-in-law
[Guest]: and we all did it together with my two brothers. And then my nieces also came along after that.
[Guest]: And I also insisted on carrying his body, which again did not go down very well. But
[Guest]: I decided that, you know, they were my brothers, my cousins, but there was also a whole bunch
[Guest]: of neighbours, many guys he didn't even like, you know, who the hell are they? You know,
[Guest]: they didn't even get along with him. So why should they do this? So that too was an interesting
[Guest]: kind of battle. And then when my mother passed away, you know, by that time the family also
[Guest]: knew. So nobody in the family objected when the women actually carried her body to the
[Amit Varma]: cremation ground. So I forgot, what was the question you asked?
[Amit Varma]: One was about atheism, but in general about your influences, intellectual, artistic books,
[Guest]: music films. Yeah. So no, it's where this atheism track took me here. Influences, well,
[Guest]: as I said, I read a lot. The interesting thing is, one of the influences for me was the flow
[Guest]: of languages around us in the house. I became very interested in languages in that time.
[Guest]: So my parents spoke to each other in Punjabi. They spoke to my grandmother in Punjabi. They
[Guest]: spoke to us in Hindi and encouraged us to also speak to each other in English. So we
[Guest]: grew up with these three languages. And later in life, I learned to read Gurmukhi and I
[Guest]: learned to read it for some very strange reason, but I was really happy because it took me
[Guest]: two days to learn the alphabet. And then of course, because I knew the language, it was
[Guest]: much, much easier to read. So one of the things was growing up with these languages around
[Guest]: us. Another interesting thing was sport. My mum used to be a badminton player. She loved
[Guest]: doing that. So when she could, she would go off and play badminton in the club. My brothers
[Guest]: played cricket and my sister and I, we played hockey. And so we all learned to be quite
[Guest]: sporty. Although I have to say that I didn't retain the interest afterwards. I spent, just
[Guest]: got too involved in reading books. And that was the other thing that my mother, because
[Guest]: she was a teacher, she was a teacher of English and our teachers in the schools encouraged
[Guest]: us all to read. Now, were we forbidden to read anything? Well, yes, to some extent,
[Guest]: we were forbidden to read comics. Not forbidden, but told don't read too much of it. And we
[Guest]: used to, of course, read them. You know, we would steal torches and hide under our razzies
[Guest]: and then read them. Parents and all knew that we were doing that, but they didn't really
[Guest]: stop us. I think one of the things that my parents did was they decided from early on,
[Guest]: and I don't know if this was my mother and father together or just my mother, to trust
[Guest]: their kids and never to say to them, you can't do this, but just advise them and then let
[Guest]: them take their own decisions. So we were, for example, never told you can't smoke.
[Guest]: You mustn't smoke. And the interesting thing is none of us took up smoking. We were never
[Guest]: told you can't smoke in front of your parents if you want to, you know, and but since none
[Guest]: of us ever smoked, it didn't matter. From a young age, we were allowed to be quite independent
[Guest]: and move around on our own. My parents didn't ask to keep track of us because they didn't
[Guest]: know how to in any case at that time, there were no cell phones or anything. So we learned
[Guest]: to travel outside, travel by bus, come back home, you know, when it was dark, all of that
[Guest]: without thinking that there was anything wrong with it. We were always encouraged to bring
[Guest]: our girlfriends, boyfriends, friends into the house. We were always, you know, many of our friends
[Guest]: grew up in our home. But my mother would very clearly say to them, you're welcome to come
[Guest]: here. You can spend as much time as you like. You can eat here, drink here, sleep here, etc.
[Guest]: But when you're eating, I will not cook for you. You will go to the tandoor nearby and
[Guest]: you will buy rotis and dal and bring them and then you can all eat and you'll wash your
[Guest]: own vartans. So actually, our friends loved it. They loved this kind of independence that
[Guest]: they got. And when we moved to Delhi in the 60s, we moved first to Nizamudin and then
[Guest]: to Jangpura. And our house was filled with all our friends who just milled about and
[Guest]: pretty much stayed there all day. So that built very, very close friendships. And many
[Guest]: of those people are, you know, part of our lives today. And because we were quite close
[Guest]: in age, the siblings, my sister, the eldest, is now three years older than me. I mean,
[Guest]: now she's always been three years older than me. So the difference between her and my younger
[Guest]: brother is four, six years. Yeah, six years. So we were quite close in age. We went to
[Guest]: university together at the same time. Reading-wise, you know, one of the things I remember very
[Guest]: much is that we were fascinated by the story of this headless horseman. There was this
[Guest]: comic and this story and we were fascinated by it. We were really frightened by it. And
[Guest]: we were convinced that this horseman would come at night and kill us all or do something.
[Guest]: So my mother, being the clever lady that she was, said, you know, ye jo aise log hote hain,
[Guest]: they get very frightened with lohe ki cheez. So then we would all think when she was asleep,
[Guest]: we would sneak off and get, you know, thala and chimta and churi and kadhai and whatnot
[Guest]: and keep them by our bedside and make sure that the headless horseman did not attack
[Guest]: us at night. Of course, everybody knew what was going on. So comics, we read a lot of
[Guest]: books. I read a lot of, of course, all this Enid Blyton and all that kind of stuff. But
[Guest]: we also were provided with Chanda Mama and Hindi magazines and books. And I grew up reading
[Guest]: those. And I'm actually really grateful to my parents for that because a lot of the time
[Guest]: English predominates, you know, and you don't sort of think of other languages. So even
[Guest]: though we grew up with Hindi and Punjabi around us, most of the reading would in the normal
[Guest]: course have been in English. But because our parents just, you know, made sure that these
[Guest]: things were around, certainly I read them. My siblings didn't as much. So of the four
[Guest]: siblings, I'm the one who's kind of most fluent in Hindi and continues to read that today.
[Guest]: But the others are absolutely fluent in speaking and everything, but they don't read or write
[Guest]: or anything. So those were the books that we read early on. We read all the classics.
[Guest]: My mother was a great admirer of Mahadevi Verma and her poetry. And I remember her reciting
[Guest]: Mahadevi Verma's poems to me when I was young. And she used to have a beautiful book of hers,
[Guest]: which I still have, of drawings, beautiful sketches and poems. And I still remember being
[Guest]: fascinated by it because it used to have the drawing now as a publisher, you know, interested
[Guest]: in paper and print and everything, I can see what it was. But at that time, it was quite
[Guest]: fascinating that there would be one orange page with an orange drawing on it. And then
[Guest]: the poem on the facing page, but in orange on white and a transparent paper in between
[Guest]: to preserve the drawings. It was quite a beautiful book. So I preserved that. She often told
[Guest]: us stories. So one of the stories she told us a lot of and which I later then read much
[Guest]: more of was the story of Hiranja. So we became familiar with some of the Punjabi stories
[Guest]: of Sasi Punnu, Hiranja, others. So these were the kind of influences, I suppose, that we
[Guest]: grew up with. There were many other things. I think Nehru came to Umballa once and we
[Guest]: all were lined up on the streets in our best frocks to meet him. We were taught music and
[Guest]: dance. I remember learning Kathak as a child. And I still remember the dress we used to
[Guest]: wear of green kurta with an orange bandhi and white silk churidar and a little topi.
[Guest]: And my mother was very interested herself in music and theatre. She worked with Sheila
[Guest]: Bhatia in some of Sheila Bhatia's plays and she used to play the sitar. So these influences
[Guest]: were all around us, you know, literature, music, movies. We used to be allowed to go
[Guest]: once a week to the cinemas in Umballa, Defence Cinema, Capital Cinema, to watch movies, which
[Guest]: were very, very cheap and everybody knew us so we could easily go there. So those are
[Guest]: some of the things. There's many others, which I suppose will return when I start thinking
[Guest]: about them.
[Amit Varma]: You've brought many of my own little memories flooding back. I think the Headless Horseman
[Amit Varma]: was from the legend of Sleepy Hollow by Washington Irving. I mean, that's where the character
[Amit Varma]: came from. And also, I remember now when I was, you know, in the early 80s, when I was
[Amit Varma]: a young boy, my parents were subscribed to Chanda Mama in both Hindi and English, because
[Amit Varma]: they wanted me to read both. And unfortunately, I have let them down by losing the Hindi habit.
[Amit Varma]: But I keep telling myself that I'm going to get back to it sometime. You know, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: friends flocking in and out of your house, friends are all the time, you still know many
[Amit Varma]: of them. And one of the themes that has interested me in recent times is, is friendships, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that, you know, some of my guests, like I remember, for example, Abhinandan Sekri
[Amit Varma]: saying this, that all his friends are people, friends he made before 25. And he's had no
[Amit Varma]: new friends since then. And one can understand that because the other people you've grown
[Amit Varma]: up with, they're in your comfort zone, it is what it is. In my case, most of my dear
[Amit Varma]: friends are people I've made well into adulthood. And they've, in a sense, been enabled by what
[Amit Varma]: the internet did to us by allowing us to form communities of choice, you know, which, by
[Amit Varma]: earlier we were restricted to communities of circumstance, you know, the geography where
[Amit Varma]: you are restricted to you to a certain group of people, your sort of where you are located
[Amit Varma]: in the social ladder can restrict you to a group of friends. But now you can meet people
[Amit Varma]: with common niche interest that you might have and that no one else you physically know
[Amit Varma]: might share with you. And you can form friends based on shared interests and shared values.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that strikes me, especially in modern times, where I hear this constant
[Amit Varma]: lament from people that, you know, my old friendships are fraying because so and so
[Amit Varma]: is support so and so in the political arena, and the WhatsApp groups have become really
[Amit Varma]: ugly, and you're having to look at everyone in a new way. So at one level, I sort of lament
[Amit Varma]: that there is an overall lack of rootedness, I sometimes feel, and that goes back to not
[Amit Varma]: having childhood friends. So they're there on Facebook, but I've never really had friends
[Amit Varma]: who've lasted from that period. Whereas at the same time, it is a blessing to be able
[Amit Varma]: to have friends with whom you have those shared connections of shared values or shared interests
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. So what are sort of your thoughts on this through your journey
[Amit Varma]: in terms of just the way friendships develop and relationships develop and so on?
[Guest]: See, our friendships or my friendships really started to develop after we moved to Delhi,
[Guest]: because when we left Ambala behind and we were children then, you know, so we don't,
[Guest]: I mean, there are people we knew then who we are still in touch with today. Not too
[Guest]: many of them, but some of them, for example, there was a family who lived next door to
[Guest]: us of several brothers called the Sens. And they had two brothers, twins, who were called
[Guest]: Lal Neel. And oddly enough, Lal had a blue mark on his neck, which is how we always knew
[Guest]: the difference. And suddenly they resurfaced in our lives somewhere recently. So on and
[Guest]: off, we are in touch with them. But at that time, pre-Delhi times, the social circle really
[Guest]: was family and cousins, a lot of cousins. And, you know, all the marriages of my aunts
[Guest]: and uncles that were taking place in our house. So my mama got married, my mother's younger
[Guest]: brother got married in our house. Then one of my chachas got married in our house, then
[Guest]: another chacha, then we traveled for another. So it was like, they were all in their twenties
[Guest]: or thirties. So they were all getting married. And because my dad was the eldest brother,
[Guest]: so it became his responsibility to do that. And there were a lot of cousins and we used
[Guest]: to meet a lot. And all summer vacations were taken up with cousins. My uncle was stationed
[Guest]: in Dehradun. He was in the army. So we used to, every summer vacation was in Dehradun.
[Guest]: My mama was in Srinagar. So then we would go to Kashmir and that kind of thing. Friendship
[Guest]: started forming when we moved to Delhi in school and then university. And many of those
[Guest]: friends stay, even though, for example, me, I'm not on Facebook. I've never been, and
[Guest]: I'm not very much on social media. So those possibilities of forming communities and everything,
[Guest]: which are very real, I think, those are things that have never opened up for me. But old
[Guest]: friends have been around and I'm still very much in touch with my school friends. In fact,
[Guest]: just yesterday or the day before I was talking to a friend, she and I were at school together
[Guest]: and my brother and sister-in-law are now visiting her in Austria. So they were sending me lots
[Guest]: of pictures and things from there of them sitting together and talking, but we have
[Guest]: remained in touch for the longest time. But where friendships are concerned, one of the
[Guest]: things that has been most meaningful, actually, for me is the kind of friendships that we
[Guest]: have formed inside the women's movement. The whole sort of involvement in women's activism
[Guest]: and in feminism has been built on a base of female friendships, which, you know, often
[Guest]: as women of my generation came into feminism and activism, we began questioning the ways
[Guest]: in which we had accepted a lot of patriarchal privilege in our friendships and relationships
[Guest]: with our men friends. And we began to find spaces in female friendships. I make it sound
[Guest]: like an academic thing, but it isn't academic. I mean, it was very real, but in trying to
[Guest]: find a few words in which to express it, I'm making it sound like an academic would write
[Guest]: it in a book. But anyway, we began to find these spaces, which were very intimate spaces,
[Guest]: which were spaces or which were spaces of great intimacy where we could share everything
[Guest]: and anything about our lives. And we knew that there would be no betrayal, that there
[Guest]: would be trust. And that was an amazingly empowering and enabling thing. You know,
[Guest]: just to know, this is exactly what you're talking about, finding communities of choice.
[Guest]: It was our community. And that community was built on female friendships. And I remember
[Guest]: one of my friends in Sri Lanka talking very movingly about this. And when she was talking,
[Guest]: I thought, yeah, this is what we have also lived through, although in a different way.
[Guest]: She was talking about the war and the conflict and how that had divided people along different
[Guest]: identities, Sinhala, Muslim, Tamil, etc. And how the women who had been together in feminist
[Guest]: activism had created another kind of subtext in this where they refused to give in to the
[Guest]: identity divisions or they tried to refuse. It's not that they always succeeded because
[Guest]: those divisions have a way of overriding other things. But they also would, for example,
[Guest]: if somebody wanted to attend a meeting and she was a Tamil woman wanting to go to a meeting,
[Guest]: her Sinhala friend would take care of her children, you know, that kind of thing. So
[Guest]: they provided solidarity to each other in this very, very difficult circumstance. And
[Guest]: when we heard that those stories, they were really important for us. There is another
[Guest]: story that I often find very, very inspiring. It's a story of this woman called Sharifa
[Guest]: Khanam. She comes from Tamil Nadu. As her name says, she's a Muslim woman from Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu. She was living and working in Delhi in the late 80s. And she had Tamil, English
[Guest]: and Hindi because she was working in Delhi. And then she got asked to come to a women's
[Guest]: conference that we had in Patna, where she was asked to work as a translator to translate
[Guest]: things that women were talking about, especially for women from Tamil Nadu who were there.
[Guest]: And when she came to that conference, one of the things that surprised her was that
[Guest]: she sat in this meeting where women were together from different parts of India and they were
[Guest]: sharing their lives. They were talking about their most, you know, daily issues, intimate
[Guest]: issues, issues to do with domestic violence, et cetera, et cetera. And she was shocked
[Guest]: and she felt that this is something that we have always been told is private. And here
[Guest]: are these women talking about it in public, although that public is a controlled public.
[Guest]: And that inspired her to go back home to Tamil Nadu and to start to set up a women's Jamaat,
[Guest]: which she then did and which today has grown to a huge organization with thousands and
[Guest]: thousands of members. But when you see those women sitting together and debating on a case
[Guest]: of domestic violence or something else and trying to reach a resolution of that case,
[Guest]: what shines through those interactions is the friendship that they have. You know, there
[Guest]: is a way in which they ease with each other. They are laughing and joking and cracking
[Guest]: your in jokes that all of them know and and yet being empathetic and all of that. And
[Guest]: that, I think, is what one of the most precious things that the women's movement has given
[Guest]: to all of us, certainly to people like me. So when you say friendship to me, I cannot
[Guest]: separate it from that. So it's not to say that one doesn't have male friends. I have
[Guest]: many very good friends and friends I've known for the longest time. And we are able to talk
[Guest]: about everything under the sun and be vulnerable with each other. But somehow these kind of
[Guest]: friendships have a different meaning altogether because they are not only personal, they're
[Guest]: also political.
[Amit Varma]: You know what you said about Sri Lanka, where, you know, a Tamil woman will go out to a meeting
[Amit Varma]: and her Sinhala friend will look after her kids and all of that. Very moving. And this
[Amit Varma]: leads me to something that I've sort of spoken about with different people in different episodes.
[Amit Varma]: The economist Shruti Kapila at one point was talking about, you know, why don't you know,
[Amit Varma]: was wondering why don't women mobilize themselves as a voting bloc? It would be so powerful.
[Amit Varma]: It's half the people and women's issues surely should be the most important issues for them.
[Amit Varma]: So why don't they do it? And I also had an episode with the journalist Rukmini S, who,
[Amit Varma]: you know, looked at all the data across the country, voting data, election data, and all
[Amit Varma]: that. And her conclusion was that women do not vote as a bloc anywhere. They are voting
[Amit Varma]: alongside whatever other, you know, margins people vote at, but it's not as a bloc of
[Amit Varma]: women. And it strikes me, therefore, that the ways in which people vote, at least as
[Amit Varma]: far as it comes to identity, you know, that there are shifting sands. And I wonder if
[Amit Varma]: some of those appeals are stronger than the others. For example, there was a time where
[Amit Varma]: you could argue that the electorate was pretty mundalized, and everything was on the basis
[Amit Varma]: of caste and so on. What the BJP manages to have done is consolidated a lot of the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: votes. And obviously, not even perhaps a majority of them, but enough to bring them to power
[Amit Varma]: comfortably, where people across caste lines are voting more and more for the BJP. And
[Amit Varma]: that's a Hindu vote. So it's on the identity there is that Hindu identity rather than say
[Amit Varma]: a caste identity, and so on. I mean, caste identities, of course, play into it, because
[Amit Varma]: they've appealed to, you know, non Jatav Dalits by saying the Jatavs are oppressing you and
[Amit Varma]: non Yadav OBCs by saying the Yadavs get all the spoils and all of that. So there are these
[Amit Varma]: constant shifting sands of identity and what matters to you at a particular time and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. Do you see a realistic hope for a time where enough women can just say ki bhot
[Amit Varma]: ho gaya, you know, women's issues matter, we are going to go with whoever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: speaks to us the best. And, you know, and that becomes something to, lines to mobilize
[Amit Varma]: along, because after all, half the people in this country are women. So what are sort
[Amit Varma]: of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: You know, this is, I think this is not a subject on which I can speak with any expertise or
[Guest]: knowledge. But if you look at the last election, and you look at the studies done by Pranoy
[Guest]: Roy and others, NDTV studies, that they very clearly indicate this very interesting trend.
[Guest]: And that's visible also, that women voters are now not voting with their families or
[Guest]: communities, but are voting for the development agenda to some, I put it in quotes, because
[Guest]: I don't know what else to call it. But they're voting for people they see as giving them
[Guest]: what they need, infrastructure, perhaps, you know, gas cylinders, even though they cost
[Guest]: money after number one, but nevertheless, and also that the women's vote and the percentage
[Guest]: of women who are voting is increasing all the time. So I think there is a way in which
[Guest]: women's political awareness is certainly changing, and stepping outside of the family fold a
[Guest]: little bit. But whether there will be a time when women will be, will look at a woman candidate
[Guest]: who is taking up women's issues, and give her the vote. I think that will take a lot
[Guest]: more doing, because if you, I mean, how can we judge these things, we can speculate, or
[Guest]: we can, I suppose, look at what we have in front of us as a little bit of evidence. So
[Guest]: if you look at the, again, what's happening in the panchayats, there you can say, okay,
[Guest]: we can see some signals that if a woman does well, and if she shows herself to be competent,
[Guest]: and if she is looking at issues that matter to women, because I don't think many of those
[Guest]: women who are fighting panchayat elections would go and say, I will focus only on women's
[Guest]: issues, because they also know what the power structure is like. But in a sense, by saying
[Guest]: we'll look at, you know, the PDS distribution, and the fair price shop, and we look at the
[Guest]: sanitation, and we look at the community centre, and we look at the school, and they're looking
[Guest]: at things that impact, deeply impact the lives of women. So I think in some ways, women are
[Guest]: making those kinds of choices. And perhaps we can extrapolate from that to say that if
[Guest]: this were to happen at a larger scale, maybe they would choose that person. But again,
[Guest]: the other thing is that that person has to be seen to be powerful, and able to make those
[Guest]: changes, or that party has to be seen to be powerful, and able to make those changes.
[Guest]: So no matter how much the Congress Party today, suppose they suddenly adopt a women's agenda
[Guest]: from tomorrow, it's not going to swing the women's vote their way. Because women will
[Guest]: also see that, you know, where's the power? Where are the resources to actually implement
[Guest]: all this? Is this just intentionality? Or is it just rhetoric? What is it? So in that
[Guest]: sense, also, I think it's going to be tough unless you can get somebody who can do that.
[Guest]: To some extent, when Mayawati came in the first time, you know, she was able to reach
[Guest]: out in that way, because people did believe what she said, because she came from the community
[Guest]: she was talking about. And so did women believe what she said. But I haven't seen a strong
[Guest]: female figure after Indira Gandhi, who wasn't particularly bothered about women anyway.
[Amit Varma]: I'm really, you know, I'll go down another track, which I visit often in my episodes,
[Amit Varma]: and I think a lot about, you mentioned about how, you know, if a particular party was to
[Amit Varma]: promise a deliverance to women, women would still be sceptical, because they would be
[Amit Varma]: like, where is the power and all of that. And I think one reason not just women, but
[Amit Varma]: everyone is sceptical of politics delivering anything is because the core consideration
[Amit Varma]: is that look, if our society is like this, what is politics going to do? Politics, after
[Amit Varma]: all is supply responding to demand. And the one question that I have been grappling with
[Amit Varma]: for a long time is that when I grew up in my elite English speaking bubble, and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, one imagined that the world was, you know, secular and tolerant and liberal
[Amit Varma]: and all of those things and everything else was an aberration and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the realizations I've had over a lot of reading and going out there and recording
[Amit Varma]: episodes with people like Akshay Mukul, who wrote the great book on the Gita Press, one
[Amit Varma]: of the realizations that I've had is that our society was always this way. It was always
[Amit Varma]: bigoted and misogynist and all of these things. And that what is happening now is that politics
[Amit Varma]: in a sense has caught up with society, that it is not as if the toxic politics that we
[Amit Varma]: see now is driving society in a particular direction, though, of course, now we are made
[Amit Varma]: perhaps in some sort of vicious circle, but that our society was always like this. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, it is, you know, anybody would then look at politics with skepticism, because
[Amit Varma]: their sense would be that, you know, if society is so deeply patriarchal, for example, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what does a politician promising mean? You know, what does a politician promising
[Amit Varma]: something mean anyway? And we've kind of, I think, seen over the decades, like the big
[Amit Varma]: lesson that liberals should have learned is that top down interventions don't work. That
[Amit Varma]: in this case, Gandhiji was right that we need to change society from the bottom up if you
[Amit Varma]: want to make society liberal. So I want to ask you your sense of this, because one way
[Amit Varma]: of looking at Indian society is what I just articulated that if on the margins of gender
[Amit Varma]: and caste and so many other things, we are a deeply illiberal society always have been.
[Amit Varma]: Another way would be to say that, you know, whatever you say of India, the opposite is
[Amit Varma]: also true. And therefore, you know, we are also liberal in terms of the way that we assimilate
[Amit Varma]: everything. If you look at our culture and our languages and our cuisines and all that,
[Amit Varma]: we just naturally taken influences from everyone. But I tend to be more on the pessimistic side
[Amit Varma]: these days. So what is your thought of this? Because when you sort of look back at society
[Amit Varma]: through the decades as you've experienced it, do you think that this was always dormant
[Amit Varma]: and it was waiting to find expression? And that's happened today and perhaps been amplified
[Amit Varma]: today, but that it was always there? Or do you feel that no, that this is a disturbing
[Amit Varma]: development and this is something that has come up in modern times and society once upon
[Amit Varma]: a time was a nicer, gentler place. So I really don't know. So what's your take on this?
[Guest]: This is the kind of question you should be asking Pratap Bhanu. He'll give you a very
[Amit Varma]: erudite knowledgeable answer to it.
[Amit Varma]: No, I have. And I've had a long episode with him, but you've got more lived experience
[Amit Varma]: than him, right? Because you're just from being older and also from being someone who
[Amit Varma]: hasn't worked in an air-conditioned office all your life, but you've gone out there and
[Amit Varma]: been out there. So, you know, that makes you the perfect person to ask, in fact.
[Guest]: No, look, I think both things are, if possible, simultaneously true, but I'm not saying what
[Guest]: you said, one way to go down this road is to say whatever you say, the opposite is always
[Guest]: true. Yeah, sure it is. But big deal, you know, we can keep saying that. So, but I do
[Guest]: think that both things are true. I think that there is a way in which in our society, the
[Guest]: seeds of both discrimination and violence have always been there. So, you know, even
[Guest]: if you put gender aside, even if you put religion aside, something like caste, how could it
[Guest]: have the resilience that it does if it hadn't been for the deep hatred and internalized
[Guest]: casteism that we all have inside us, even though we like to think we are very liberal.
[Guest]: So, you know, when I'm teaching my classes, for example, sometimes I and the sessions
[Guest]: we do on caste, I often bring in a Dalit speaker and basically I just ask them to talk about
[Guest]: their lives. And it's something that my young students have never even considered. But when
[Guest]: you talk to them, they will say, no, but we are not casteist. And then when you start
[Guest]: opening up that experience and start questioning them about it, they will say, oh, yes, you
[Guest]: know, now we realize that the woman who comes to work in our house, she drinks out of a
[Guest]: different cup. So suddenly those things start to become visible, which you have taken as
[Guest]: normal, which is the same thing with gender discrimination. You know, when people start
[Guest]: to articulate it, that's when you actually also start to see it. So I think that these
[Guest]: things have always been there in our society. I mean, I don't think the image of India as
[Guest]: a nonviolent nation is actually true. And yet I would say that if you look back at,
[Guest]: let's say, history as we know it, you look back maybe 200 years, maybe more, who knows.
[Guest]: If these things were so deep, we would have all been killing each other constantly all
[Guest]: the time. So what is it that what's the glue that holds these communities together in some
[Guest]: kind of social contract that recognizes that there is deep discrimination? It's very misogynist.
[Guest]: It's very casteist. It's very, you know, full of prejudice, full of anger. And yet there's
[Guest]: something that keeps people from being continually violent towards each other. So this was a
[Guest]: question I was also faced with when I was working on Partition, that when you look at
[Guest]: Hindu Muslim society, if you just look at the Punjab, the Punjabi Hindu and the Punjabi
[Guest]: Sikh was extremely wealthy, better off, occupied all the sort of top professions, teaching
[Guest]: or all kinds of things, whereas the Muslim was a peasant, the landless laborer, deeply
[Guest]: indebted, perhaps the most indebted peasant in India, and also subjected to the kind of
[Guest]: discriminatory treatment. So you have the conditions for an outbreak of violence right
[Guest]: there. And if it happens, nobody's going to be surprised by it. And yet you don't see
[Guest]: it until such time or you don't see it in any great measure. Until such time as the
[Guest]: British start kind of stoking it. So I'm not sure what the answer is. Is it that people
[Guest]: continue to live with inequality and discrimination and don't really protest about it until something
[Guest]: catalyzes that protest? But if I try to bring that knowledge to bear on the women's movement,
[Guest]: I don't see that happening over there. Yes, women continue to live with discrimination,
[Guest]: but in the, in this century and in the past century, so if you take it from the 70s on
[Guest]: till now, when you have seen feminist activism, it hasn't come out of a context of anybody
[Guest]: uksawing the women, but it has come out of a context of women themselves actually realizing
[Guest]: post-independence, how the promises of independence to them are not being fulfilled. And that
[Guest]: is driving them to fight for the change that they want. You might say that the difference
[Guest]: is that that is not violence, that is protest and resistance, whereas in other cases you
[Guest]: have violence against the other community and that could be a possible kind of explanation.
[Guest]: But I also don't think that even though, you know, Akshay talks about the Hindi public
[Guest]: sphere and that study of the Gita Press talks so evocatively about the ways in which that
[Guest]: forms a base for what we call Hindutva today. I still feel that what we perhaps misname
[Guest]: as secularism, and maybe we need to see it as respect, acceptance, tolerance of other
[Guest]: religions. I still think that that is a very deep characteristic of this society. But I
[Guest]: don't have an adequate explanation for how these two things exist together. What I actually
[Guest]: fail to understand, and I don't know if Pratap or people like that can explain it or even
[Guest]: if Akshay can explain it, is this deep sense of feeling victimized by the Hindus. You know,
[Guest]: where does that come from? I can't see the logic of it at all. And I don't know, there
[Guest]: was, you know, RWAs these days, these Resident Welfare Associations, they are hotbeds of
[Guest]: this kind of WhatsApp messages passing on. So there was a WhatsApp message on our RWA
[Guest]: the other day, which said, mosques get this much allowance, rupees XYZ per day, churches
[Guest]: get so much and temples get so much. And it looked like temples get half of what mosques
[Guest]: get. And then there was a little text next to it saying all the, you know, predictable
[Guest]: things. So I just read it and usually I don't respond to these things. And I just responded
[Guest]: saying, you know, this is not a forum where we should be putting these things out. And
[Guest]: we should be careful about all of this. Then I got some mail back saying, yes, but the
[Guest]: truth is the truth. So I just put another line saying, you know, even if this were true,
[Guest]: which I doubt, because you provided no sources or anything, but even if this were true, why
[Guest]: blame the Muslims for it? If you as Hindus are feeling discriminated against for getting
[Guest]: less money, why not fight for it and ask your, ask the state, because it's the state that's
[Guest]: decided, no? It's not the Muslims. And I put a thing saying, you know, we women don't have
[Guest]: many rights in India. We don't blame you guys, but we fight for our rights. So that lit some
[Guest]: kind of flame or something. But anyway, finally it quietened down the discussion. But then
[Guest]: one of my neighbours put in saying, yeah, we shouldn't be having this discussion on
[Guest]: this channel. But the fact is that we Hindus, we have been discriminated against and we
[Guest]: have not been given the same concessions. And I thought, what are they talking about?
[Guest]: You know, you hear the Hindu guys saying, oh, Muslims have four wives. Is that even
[Guest]: a thing to talk about? I mean, can you even talk about it with any kind of face? Like,
[Guest]: how can you say, mujhe bhi chaar bibhiyan chahiye? Sharam nahi aati hai, you know? It's like
[Guest]: really weird. So I don't know if these are deep characteristics of our society. I like
[Guest]: to think that we are much more accepting. We are much more, you know, the ghule mile
[Guest]: jo kehte hain, with other religion and other customs and so on. Even though, of course,
[Guest]: the separation in the personal and all of that is really quite horrific. So shaadiya
[Guest]: nahi hoti hain yeh sab kuch. But still, you know, we have up till now been, at least modern
[Guest]: India, been a relatively, relatively peaceful society. Something must be there to explain
[Amit Varma]: that. I don't know what it is. One of the things I pride myself for is having a good
[Amit Varma]: bullshit detector when it comes to Hindutva propaganda. So I can guarantee you that that
[Guest]: mosque's temple thing is obviously made up. It's made up because one of the neighbours
[Guest]: immediately put a thing and we showed it was exactly equal to everybody. I had a conversation
[Amit Varma]: with a friend a few years ago, which really disturbed me because he was a well educated
[Amit Varma]: English speaking friend with an MBA degree and all of that, absolute hardcore corporate
[Amit Varma]: types. And he one day told me that, you know, the Muslim rebirth replacement rate is nine
[Amit Varma]: or something, some ridiculous figure. And I was like, wait a minute, just take a step
[Amit Varma]: back and think of the figure like nine. It's not even like, you know, and I happen to know
[Amit Varma]: the figures. So I told him the figures and I explained that Muslims are slightly more
[Amit Varma]: because poor people tend to have more kids and so on and so forth. But it's incredible
[Amit Varma]: that there is not only like, you know, if it was such an outlandish figure about some
[Amit Varma]: other thing, say soul of the sale of dosas versus biryanis, you know, he would put his
[Amit Varma]: critical cap on and analyse it. But because it is something that is in line with existing
[Amit Varma]: prejudices, toh kuch bhi chalega. I have a question, which I think is sort of I was saving
[Amit Varma]: for later, but seems apt to this as well to the subject that you mentioned as well, which
[Amit Varma]: is that you've pointed out, you know, in your I think, introduction to other side of silence
[Amit Varma]: and elsewhere, that there wasn't at one time, as much of partition studies as you would
[Amit Varma]: have liked that, you know, people sometimes treated it as something that has happened
[Amit Varma]: in the past, or people would sort of say ki theek hai woh toh ho gaya bhi kya zarurat hai,
[Amit Varma]: you know, let it be. And whereas people like you and others correctly felt that no need
[Amit Varma]: to do more of it. And I was wondering that, is that also a part of sort of denial, that
[Amit Varma]: a reason to not look back at partition is because it reveals something about a human
[Amit Varma]: nature and be our society itself. And we would prefer to be in denial of it, because those
[Amit Varma]: are truths, you give it a trigger, you light the right match. And you could have that kind
[Amit Varma]: of violence and that kind of crime all over again. And I wonder if that denial kind of
[Amit Varma]: plays into it, like when we speak about why have we been such a sort of peaceful society
[Amit Varma]: relative to what could have happened? One of my answers is just inertia, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: inertia, and like, I'm half bong. So at least from that part of my heritage, I can say laziness.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, that's one of the answers. But what if the core truth about human nature
[Amit Varma]: and about our society is something uglier. And that's part of what stops us from looking
[Amit Varma]: at partition. We don't want to see that, because we're looking in the mirror.
[Guest]: I love this idea of inertia, actually, it's quite interesting. So no, you're so right
[Guest]: about that, actually. I think one of the things that about India that I strongly feel is that
[Guest]: as a nation, as a people, we are totally unwilling to confront unpleasant truths about our past,
[Guest]: and even our present. We kind of wish them away. We think, baat nahi karenge toh gaayab
[Guest]: ho jayega, let it be. And that has been, I think, one of the reasons why, for example,
[Guest]: with partition, we've been so reluctant to confront it, to talk about it in ways that
[Guest]: might open up things that we don't want to see. So in a sense, if you look at the Holocaust,
[Guest]: you see that you can easily pinpoint the Nazis and the fact that they are the ones who perpetrated
[Guest]: the violence on the Jews. So there is a perpetrator and there's a victim. Here, there isn't. Everybody
[Guest]: killed, people participated in the making of violent instruments. I mean, even my father's
[Guest]: friends told us how they made those bombs inside, Molotov things in their flats, Molotov
[Guest]: cocktails in their flats and so on. So in a sense, to confront that past would be like
[Guest]: saying that we have to come up against ourselves. We have to see our own complicity. We have
[Guest]: to see where we went wrong, why we went wrong. We have to admit it. And it's not easy. It's
[Guest]: always easier to put the blame on the others. So even when figures are traded, the figures
[Guest]: of offense are more lodged at Pakistan's door than they are at our door. And I remember
[Guest]: that when, you know, in the early days, when my work on partition was published, there
[Guest]: were two scholars working with the Center for the Study of Developing Societies who
[Guest]: wrote a piece in seminar I think it was, which basically critiqued my book, which is fine,
[Guest]: but took the argument that, you know, why rake up all this now? It's done. It's finished.
[Guest]: Put it under the carpet and forget it. And we do say that a lot of the time in India,
[Guest]: you know, and you think that as long as something's in the past, it'll go away. But as history
[Guest]: shows again and again, it doesn't go away. For those people who have been at the receiving
[Guest]: end of this violence, that memory is not something that they can easily wish away. That sense
[Guest]: of hurt and being wounded and being betrayed is not something that can easily vanish. And
[Guest]: it doesn't vanish with time. And it doesn't vanish even with death. Because in a sense,
[Guest]: it gets passed on and passed on through generations to families and others. So why is it that
[Guest]: we are unable and unwilling to deal with it? And I don't have an answer to that. But I
[Guest]: think there is a certain kind of maturity that nations require to deal with traumatic
[Guest]: pasts where you have to admit your own culpability. And I think for all our openness and welcoming
[Guest]: of knowledge from all over the world and all of that, we've always had this thing that
[Guest]: India has a lot to give to the world, but we don't have that much to learn from it.
[Guest]: You know, we have our tradition, we have our this, we have our that, and the world can
[Guest]: learn so much from us. But we also need to learn from the world. And we don't actually
[Guest]: acknowledge that at all. So in a way, people's histories, people's traumas, especially at
[Guest]: the time of the making of the nation, they have remained untalked of. In other countries,
[Guest]: you might actually have much, much larger research projects that try to document memory,
[Guest]: that try to archive memory, that try to create a record of that time, so that we know what
[Guest]: happened, so that we, in some ways, acknowledge that it happened to our own people. And it
[Guest]: was done often by our own people. But also, that in some ways, we learn from it so that
[Guest]: it's never repeated. That humility we don't actually have. And I remember that when I
[Guest]: was first, when I first discovered the extent of family violence towards their own women
[Guest]: and children during partition, I was really surprised at how this thing had kind of just
[Guest]: been in the realm of silence. Nobody had talked about it. And yet, it was something that everybody
[Guest]: knew. And why didn't we talk about it? Because it's so much easier to dress it up as honor
[Guest]: killing, so much more difficult to talk about it as murder, which is wars. And as murder
[Guest]: in of our own people by our own people. But I think that kind of honesty is really needed.
[Guest]: I mean, discussions about partition, even to this day, despite the fact that so much
[Guest]: work has been done by so many scholars, that has opened up innumerable areas, which, you
[Guest]: know, were not apparent to us before. So much work has been done. And yet, you will never
[Guest]: see an open discussion on television talking about culpability, talking about violence.
[Guest]: You'll never see that. What's the fear? But there is a fear. I don't know what it is,
[Amit Varma]: but it's there.
[Amit Varma]: As we contemplate the fear, I have no doubt you're right now feeling the fear of having
[Amit Varma]: to go on and on talking with me. Let's take a quick commercial break. And on the other
[Amit Varma]: side of the break, we'll sort of continue down your personal journey and take delightful
[Amit Varma]: digressions as and when they present themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com,
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Urvashi Bhutalia on her fascinating
[Amit Varma]: life and journey and thoughts. And, you know, we sort of covered your early childhood from,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Ambala to Delhi and so on and so forth. And tell me now about what happens
[Amit Varma]: when you start going to college like you did a BA literature from Miranda House in 71.
[Amit Varma]: You did a you did two masters from DU in 73 and then a South Asian studies in 77. So tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about sort of the environment of college and what were you like at this point
[Amit Varma]: in time? What was your sense of yourself as in terms of, you know, what do you want to
[Amit Varma]: go ahead and do? And you know, what does life look like to you at that vantage point?
[Guest]: You know, at the time that I went to college, Amit, I joined Miranda House in I think it
[Guest]: was the end of 68. Yeah, probably around then to do my master to do a BA in English. Now,
[Guest]: in a sense, I had always wanted to study literature because I loved books and literature and reading.
[Guest]: But also in a way, at that time in Delhi University, there were not that many options open to you
[Guest]: if you wanted to be in the humanities, social sciences. We didn't have that many courses
[Guest]: and I hadn't yet fallen in love with history. So literature was the option. And that's what
[Guest]: I did. The university at that time, it was very important to be on the campus because
[Guest]: the campus was a place where a lot of student activity happened. The police were not allowed
[Guest]: into the campus at that time. It was our protected area. And all the universities across India,
[Guest]: I guess, but Delhi University, because I was there, I remember very well that the kind
[Guest]: of winds of political unrest from across India were touching us all the time. We heard of
[Guest]: things, we read about them. There was theatre and discussions and all kinds of things. And
[Guest]: in the 70s, many of our colleagues actually were very inspired by the Naxalite movement.
[Guest]: And several of them went, left college and joined the movement and went underground.
[Guest]: People like me never had the courage to do that and never also had the wish to do that
[Guest]: because although we found the discussions and things exciting, but I think we weren't
[Guest]: that deeply drawn into it. It was also a time when we were as young women in the university
[Guest]: coming to a realization of issues to do with feminism. So in one way, many of us, because
[Guest]: we were widely read, we had read a lot of feminist literature coming from the West.
[Guest]: There wasn't that much available in India at that time. But in another way, we were
[Guest]: involved in issues to do with women in the university. Hostel conditions, the fact that
[Guest]: women had to come back early, buses. So we fought to get special buses for women because
[Guest]: first we fought to get special buses for students. And then we found that those were fully occupied
[Guest]: by these guys who would come early and block three seats like mushrandas and not let anybody
[Guest]: sit there. Then when we came in, we would have to ask their permission. So we fought
[Guest]: to get special buses for women. So we were involved in these issues in some ways.
[Guest]: In Miranda House, which was actually for me, when we were choosing which colleges to apply
[Guest]: for admission to, my only choice was Miranda House. I didn't apply anywhere else. And I
[Guest]: had made that choice quite consciously. Partly it was because my mother was there, although
[Guest]: she never studied there. As I explained, she lived in the hostel. But partly it was because
[Guest]: Miranda wasn't such an elite college. It was a college that had a profile of students from
[Guest]: across class and cast. And it was also a college that offered science courses and did not kind
[Guest]: of play into the stereotype that women must only study certain kinds of subjects, home
[Guest]: science or literature or even though I did study literature.
[Guest]: We were lucky enough to have some fantastic teachers who were quite young people. Not
[Guest]: all of them were young, but some of them who were close in age to us, having graduated
[Guest]: a few years ago and everything. And they inspired us to do research, to take part in theatre,
[Guest]: to do lots of things. But we were also fortunate to have some teachers who were older and who
[Guest]: were like icons in the university. So one of my tutors, one of my favourite teachers,
[Guest]: when I did my master's, she became my tutor, was a woman called Mrs. Krishna, who was like
[Guest]: a legend to us because she had married three times. And the third husband was a Russian
[Guest]: called Isaulov. And they together had a son called Vladimir. And all of us were in love
[Guest]: with Vladimir, although we had never met him. We'd never seen him or anything. She had a
[Guest]: picture of him hanging in the house and we all decided we were going to marry Vladimir.
[Guest]: So there was Mrs. Krishna and she became my tutor. And I still remember that she made
[Guest]: me write a paper and she made me rewrite it almost 10 times because the first time I handed
[Guest]: it to her, she threw it back at me and said, it's rubbish, go back and rewrite it. And
[Guest]: by the time I wrote it for the ninth or tenth time, I was in tears. And then I gave it to
[Guest]: her and she said to me, now, this is a gem and don't ever forget that you must write
[Guest]: from the heart. And I have never forgotten that lesson. Actually, for me, it was my really
[Guest]: important lesson in how to write.
[Amit Varma]: Do you still have that paper?
[Guest]: No. No, all I remember is it was on Troilus and Cressida. So that much I know, but I don't
[Guest]: have it. How would one preserve something from that time? So there was all this political
[Guest]: stuff going on and we were participating in discussions and everything. Miranda House
[Guest]: was one of the most political colleges of all. And yet it used to do some strange things.
[Guest]: For example, it had a beauty contest for freshers. So when I joined, we all had to dress up and
[Guest]: walk the ramp in high heels that meant walking the rickety old Miranda House stage and be
[Guest]: judged by a group of people. And we hadn't yet come into feminism in ways that were to
[Guest]: manifest themselves later. So I remember that the first year we didn't protest about it
[Guest]: at all. But over time, we began to realize what was happening and we began to protest
[Guest]: about the beauty competition. We also became the first women's college to join the Delhi
[Guest]: University Students' Union because the Delhi University Students' Union was seen as within
[Guest]: quotes dirty and political, and it was dominated by men. But it wasn't yet such a political
[Guest]: party dominated thing. It did have that, but it still had people who were not necessarily
[Guest]: followed up by political parties. But we felt very strongly in Miranda House that why should
[Guest]: we stay out of this union because the university is our space and this union is our space.
[Guest]: And so we joined it facing a lot of criticism, but we did join it. I also became involved
[Guest]: in college politics. So in my first year of my master's degree, I stood for college president
[Guest]: and won the election and then was able to try and implement some things. But I learned
[Guest]: that college politics, like politics anywhere, can also be a hard and somewhat unpleasant
[Guest]: lesson. And that one year of being college president cured me of the desire to be in
[Guest]: politics forever. So the university was an extremely vibrant place and a place where
[Guest]: a lot of things were buzzing. There was a lot of ferment. And we were as young women
[Guest]: coming into our feminism at that point. And I finished my master's degree in 73. And even
[Guest]: before I had finished, it went into a job with Oxford University Press. And that was
[Guest]: to shape my future as a publisher in very, very fundamental ways. But it was also the
[Guest]: time that apart from Naqsh-e-Bari and others, there were a number of other very fascinating,
[Guest]: interesting, inspiring protest movements across India that touched us. So there had been in
[Guest]: the 60s and the 70s in Maharashtra, the Shahada movement, which was a peasant movement and
[Guest]: many feminists were writing about it. And we, you know, got to read some of their work.
[Guest]: There was the anti-price rise movement in Gujarat, which was a movement. Thousands and
[Guest]: thousands of women came out on the streets to protest against rising prices of commodities.
[Guest]: And they brought out their belans and their bartans and their ladles and all of that.
[Guest]: There was the Bodh Gaya movement and some of the women we knew were involved in that,
[Guest]: which was a movement of students inspired by Jayaprakash Narayan and students fighting
[Guest]: to recover land and for the implementation of land reform and so on. So they managed
[Guest]: to seize about 5,000 acres of land from the Bodh Gaya mutt. And when it came to redistribution
[Guest]: of that land, that's when the question came up of why are the pattas only in the name
[Guest]: of men and why not in the name of women, because women have also fought for this. So all this
[Guest]: was happening around that period. There was Chipko also. So we got to hear about all of
[Guest]: these things. And it was very inspiring. And it was what pushed us into the discussions
[Guest]: that led to us becoming feminists, really. And in about 76, I think, when I had been
[Guest]: working in Sweden University Press for a few years, so that was also a very interesting
[Guest]: thing, actually. I knew by the time I had finished my master's degree that although
[Guest]: I deeply loved literature, I did not want to have anything to do with it in terms of
[Guest]: a career, because it was only English literature. And the more I became involved in ground level
[Guest]: grassroots type of work, the less relevant Spencer and Milton seemed to me. And I was
[Guest]: determined not to do that. But at that time, the only career open to women who had studied
[Guest]: literature was to become teachers. And because I was good at my subject, my teachers thought
[Guest]: I would become a teacher. But I was absolutely determined not to. And it was pure chance
[Guest]: that I had been studying French on the side. And for a very nefarious reason, that the
[Guest]: French Alliance Francaise had a very handsome teacher and all the young women were in love
[Guest]: with him. And we thought, okay, we'll get a chance with this guy. And then next door
[Guest]: to the Alliance Francaise was the only one of the few really seedy restaurants cum cafes
[Guest]: in South Delhi called Shagufa, where there were dark lights and you know, all of that.
[Guest]: And we used to be able to go there and meet up with the guys. And of course, there was
[Guest]: no place you could get a drink or anything like that. Delhi was very different. The height
[Guest]: of being subversive was to get a cup of chai or not even coffee, because coffee wasn't
[Guest]: fashionable at that time. So in my French class was a young woman who worked with Oxford
[Guest]: University Press as a secretary. And she said to me one day, you know, you're always grumbling
[Guest]: about not wanting to teach, etc. So why don't you come to OUP, we have some freelance jobs
[Guest]: that you can do. So I went along and the freelance job was a very inglorious thing. I was called
[Guest]: a paster upper. And I basically had to paste names like Ram and Sita on top of names like
[Guest]: John and Mary, to turn British textbooks into books that could be used in Indian schools.
[Guest]: And you know, it was a it was a great sort of skill was needed, because Ram had only
[Guest]: three letters, John had four. So I had to paste it somewhere across so that there would
[Guest]: be equal white space on either side. And I used to have to work with a glue called rubber
[Guest]: solution, which is used for bicycle tires. And I became very familiar with bicycle shops
[Guest]: in Delhi. So that was really fun. And actually, in Oxford University Press, when I finished
[Guest]: freelancing, they offered me a job as a trainee. And they sent me the job was in book production
[Guest]: with the production manager, who was a man called Adrian Bullock. And they sent me to
[Guest]: a printing press. And I completely fell in love with the printing press. And I had carried
[Guest]: this unsubstantiated dream in my head of actually wanting to become a printer. And of having
[Guest]: a small platen press, which I would put on a table in my room, and where I would print
[Guest]: political pamphlets for all my friends who were involved in different political campaigns.
[Guest]: Of course, that dream never materialized, but I got the next best thing. And then I
[Guest]: decided that publishing is something that I truly love and where I want to stay all
[Guest]: my life. So the teaching career was swiftly abandoned. I remained in publishing. I'm there
[Guest]: till this day. And I have not had a day when I don't continue to be in love with the profession
[Guest]: and with what I do over there. And alongside my work, involvement in feminist groups materialized.
[Guest]: And I mean, different things started to happen. We formed groups in Delhi, we started to meet,
[Guest]: we started traveling all over India, seeing what other groups were doing. We decided to
[Guest]: start a magazine that was a magazine Manushi, which we actually started jointly together
[Guest]: 18 of us and before it was taken over by Madhu. And we then decided to we formed a street
[Guest]: theater group. And we decided to campaign against dowry and rape through in many different
[Guest]: ways, including through the medium of street theater. So we created a play called Om Swaha.
[Guest]: And later, we created a play called Dafa 372 or something, I forget exactly the title.
[Guest]: And we took it around from place to place performing and getting people's reactions
[Guest]: and raising discussions, but also holding many, many demonstrations, along with other
[Guest]: women's groups on issues to do with women, because by this time, all of the country,
[Guest]: you know, these issues were coming up in 1978 is when the courts in delivered the Mathura
[Guest]: judgment in the rape case of a young woman called Mathura in Maharashtra. And when four
[Guest]: legal professors, Upendra Bakshi, Vasudada Gamwar, Lotika Sarkar and somebody called
[Guest]: Kelkar wrote an open letter to the Chief Justice saying this is a travesty of justice because
[Guest]: this young woman was, the rapists were acquitted because she was labeled a woman of bad character
[Guest]: because she had had sex before. So that open letter acted as a catalyst for a nationwide
[Guest]: movement against rape. And we were all drawn into it. We all worked at it. When I think
[Guest]: back now, I wonder how we communicated because we had no methods of communication. You know,
[Guest]: there were no cell phones, there was no internet. We did not even have landlines. If you had
[Guest]: a landline phone, you had to make a phone call to Bombay. You had to book a trunk call,
[Guest]: which cost the earth. And if you needed to get through quickly and quickly meant two,
[Guest]: three hours, then you had to book what was called a lightning call, which cost like four
[Guest]: times the more. But we managed to do it somehow and build a campaign, which resulted in 83
[Guest]: in the changing the first ever change in the IPC on the issue of rape. So all of this was,
[Guest]: I mean, this is a long journey, but starting from college, this is how it kind of ended
[Guest]: up in getting involved with women's issues and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll, you know, ask you in much more detail about your publishing career. But first, I'd
[Amit Varma]: like to sort of talk about this growing feminism, both in terms of your own feminism and in
[Amit Varma]: terms of the feminist movement in India, you know, and one of the things I'm interested
[Amit Varma]: in is that, how did you sort of begin to develop frameworks to think about the subject, like
[Amit Varma]: it's one thing to have that instinctive sense of this is just and this is unjust. And there's
[Amit Varma]: another to actually build frameworks, read books, build a theory around it, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. And apart from that, how does that then that theory then interact with what
[Amit Varma]: is on the ground, like you pointed out that a lot of the feminist theory that was available
[Amit Varma]: to you was from the West, there was not so much quite at that time from India. And you've
[Amit Varma]: mentioned elsewhere that, you know, the history of Western feminism is one thing, but it may
[Amit Varma]: be a mistake to take that lens and look at Indian feminism through it, right? Because
[Amit Varma]: then you can, you know, make the in a sense that paster upper thing of putting Sita Gita
[Amit Varma]: on whatever can, you know, be a sort of a metaphor for that. And later separately, you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about how, you know, it might be okay to, you know, have absolute notions like agency
[Amit Varma]: is always good. But even there, there are nuances that is agency always good when, you
[Amit Varma]: know, agency can be used by women to demand or enforce violence against other women, as
[Amit Varma]: you've put it. So all these nuances start creeping in when the real world collides with
[Amit Varma]: the frames through which you look at the real world. So I'd be very interested in learning
[Amit Varma]: about these processes within you, because what happens is and what I've seen in myself
[Amit Varma]: and in others is that when you discover a framework, the way of looking at the world,
[Amit Varma]: initially, you're just infatuated, you know, that becomes a hammer for every nail, and
[Amit Varma]: you're quick to pass judgment using your framework, and so on and so forth. But later over time,
[Amit Varma]: you understand that the world is really complex. And you, you know, you start sort of modifying
[Amit Varma]: the ways in which you look at the world. So tell me about, you know, how this process
[Amit Varma]: played out for you.
[Guest]: You know, I don't, I wouldn't use the phrase that you use, which is when the real world
[Guest]: collides with whatever it is that you have built up as a framework. So I think in the
[Guest]: early days, even though some of us who had the privilege of being educated and so on
[Guest]: read Western feminism, I think by and large, we were all full of doubt about how those
[Guest]: ideas of radical feminism, socialist feminism, etc, applied to us. Because even, for example,
[Guest]: if you were to take socialism in the Indian context, it meant something quite different.
[Guest]: So while many of us embraced the label of feminism, we were a bit reluctant to embrace
[Guest]: the other labels because we didn't quite know where we fit into them. Yet there were people
[Guest]: who did that. It's not that everybody didn't do that. The other thing is that we didn't
[Guest]: begin with the need for theories. We began really by both noticing what was going on
[Guest]: around us and reacting to it. So if you look at the map of feminist activity or women's
[Guest]: activity in India at that time, you will see something like Chipko, which you cannot label
[Guest]: a feminist movement, even though it was led by women and so on and so forth. And yet it's
[Guest]: something that did deeply influence the history of feminism in raising questions, not necessarily
[Guest]: consciously, about the relationship of women with nature, in raising questions about resources
[Guest]: and women's work. Fetching water becomes much more difficult when the forest is cut down
[Guest]: and the water level goes down. All of these issues came into our consciousness through
[Guest]: something like Chipko. In the same way, the Shahada movement, not a feminist movement
[Guest]: and yet dominated by women and also focused around stories of sexual assault of tribal
[Guest]: women taken from place to place by a singer, a ballad singer called Ambar Singh. There
[Guest]: were women at the heart of that movement and they were kind of raising issues. So for many
[Guest]: of us who were in cities and who were at a distance from these movements, the questions
[Guest]: were what is the nature of work for women? How do we deal with this question of peasants
[Guest]: and their rights? What are the battles that need to be fought over here? How are they
[Guest]: different from the battles to do with the environment? Then with the Mathura case, rape
[Guest]: became an issue. There were many things that we understood and many things that we didn't.
[Guest]: The actions that we took were based on the things that we understood. Over the years,
[Guest]: the limitations of what we understood became clear to us. So in a sense, our learnings
[Guest]: get incorporated into the next steps that we take as feminists. But it's really important
[Guest]: to see the history of that because without a history, it makes no sense at all. So in
[Guest]: a sense, I think one, we were very reluctant to bring to bear on our work frames that we
[Guest]: knew didn't apply to them, but we didn't have frames of our own or we didn't know how to
[Guest]: articulate them. What we did have, which we were very lucky with, I think, was the fact
[Guest]: that people who were active within the movement were cut across class and caste and were equally
[Guest]: academics, let's say, and activists and urban poor and rural activists and so on and so
[Guest]: forth. So those perspectives never disappeared. And I don't recall any academic trying to
[Guest]: impose a theory on us, but we just had lots and lots of questions. And those questions
[Guest]: continue to this day, except that they have become much more nuanced, as you have said
[Guest]: also, much more complex. So, for example, with the question of rape, the initial demands
[Guest]: that we made in changes in the law, one was in the definition of rape. One was that we
[Guest]: felt that the survivor's name should never be revealed because she faces a lot of stigma
[Guest]: and her past sexual conduct should not be in question and so on. Now, this thing of
[Guest]: her name should not be revealed because she faces a lot of stigma may have made sense
[Guest]: at that time. It doesn't make that much sense today. A lot of women are saying, why should
[Guest]: we be the ones who have to be silent? You know, we should not. I mean, we want to speak
[Guest]: about it. We should be able to speak about it. Also, the speaking about it somewhere
[Guest]: touches on the stigma and lessens it, because if you can speak about it, then it becomes
[Guest]: within the realm of the spoken and sometimes that kind of helps it to become less stigmatized.
[Guest]: We don't know, but that does happen. So, today we would argue for different things.
[Guest]: So when the 2013 amendments came, what did women argue for? Many other things. They argued
[Guest]: for a broadening of the definition, but they also argued for the victim or survivor being
[Guest]: gender neutral, because they said it's not only women, it's men and trans people. You
[Guest]: can say the perpetrator can be male, maybe, because we don't yet have instances we don't
[Guest]: know. But they also argued for, for example, mass rape, which we had not taken into account
[Guest]: because we had not seen sexual violence happening in political conflict and we had not seen
[Guest]: it. That doesn't mean that it didn't happen. It's just that we didn't. We were not geared
[Guest]: to looking at it. But when we realized it, it became part of the whole thing. Army rape,
[Guest]: the question of marital rape. So you see the trajectory, you see how the movement is growing,
[Guest]: changing, understanding nuance, understanding complexity, and therefore the actions, activities,
[Guest]: demands, all of that are becoming equally influenced by that nuancing. So that time
[Guest]: we were young, we were innocent, we were naive, and we didn't have any frameworks. Now, I
[Guest]: think we have some, but I think that there is still in India, not that distance between
[Guest]: theory and practice. Because for us, in some ways, what the women's movement has tried
[Guest]: to preserve is that theory cannot be divorced from practice. There is no such thing as a
[Guest]: theoretical frame and an empirical reality. It's nonsense to think like that. Because
[Guest]: then you are recreating the power equation and saying somebody has a right to make this
[Guest]: frame and someone else lives that reality. That hasn't been part of this movement.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about sort of some of your early heroes within the movement, like in other
[Amit Varma]: interviews, like earlier, just now you mentioned Lothika Sarkar as part of one of the lawyers
[Amit Varma]: who kind of wrote back to them. In other interviews, you mentioned people like Veena Mazumdar,
[Amit Varma]: Leela Dubey, Vimla Faruqui, and so on and so forth. So, you know, tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about sort of these early people and the impact that they had on you and the ways in which
[Amit Varma]: they might have inspired you and how that sort of, you know, through this entire process,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what was the sense of yourself developing like, like, at what point, like, I guess,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you realize literature wasn't for you when you got into publishing and fell
[Amit Varma]: in love with publishing and all of that. But in a sense, your entire life has been from
[Amit Varma]: where the vantage point, the distant vantage point from where I can see is really a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a crusade to make the world a better place for women, you know, and essentially a feminist
[Amit Varma]: act. So when did, when did you like, did you just gradually grow into it without realizing
[Amit Varma]: it? And finally, this is who you were? Or, you know, were there people who sort of inspired
[Amit Varma]: you when you could look at their lives and say, yes, I want to be like that person?
[Guest]: There were a lot of women who were inspirational at that time. These were all women of my mother's
[Guest]: generation who had taken part in the nationalist movement, who had been part of Gandhi's campaigns,
[Guest]: and because of whom we were able to be who we were. So all the women that you have named,
[Guest]: Veena Mazumdar, for sure, Veenadhi was really quite special. And she, in heading, not well
[Guest]: in, yeah, more or less pushing the committee on the status of women and their report on
[Guest]: India, she produced something that really was like a catalyst for much of our activism
[Guest]: subsequently. And, you know, unlike government reports, usually where you don't have no respect
[Guest]: for the people who are doing it, because they are often placed there by the state, the group
[Guest]: of women who led this was really an independent thinking set of women. And miraculously, they
[Guest]: could get that report in, into the government and into the public domain at that time, almost
[Guest]: by a slate of hand, because remember that this was the time of the emergency. And so
[Guest]: much political activity was curtailed, many of our friends were in jail. It was a surprise
[Guest]: to us, we didn't question it, that Mrs. Gandhi forgot about the report and just let it through.
[Guest]: But it strengthened our hands quite a lot. So for women who were able to achieve that
[Guest]: kind of thing, I think that that, you know, they deserved our respect. Our politics, like
[Guest]: with every generation, were different from theirs. I had a lot of differences with the
[Guest]: way my mother's feminism built up. But that didn't mean that we didn't respect who they
[Guest]: were and where they were coming from and what we owed to them. And I think that generational
[Guest]: thing happens with every generation. Now, how did the involvement in feminism or women's
[Guest]: activism and my publishing come together? In actually very organic kind of ways. It's
[Guest]: not that I left literature behind. I love literature, I still read, I would, you know,
[Guest]: any day like to spend my time just reading. But I found that studying English literature
[Guest]: was not where I wanted to be. Had Delhi University at that time had courses which took in Indian,
[Guest]: Asian, other literatures, I have no doubt I would have stayed on there. But I was too
[Guest]: involved in the politics of the women's activism in India to feel, to live with the distance
[Guest]: between what I was studying and what my life was. It is, you know, you spoke about the
[Guest]: frame and the thing. It was a bit like that. The frame was completely alien and lovely
[Guest]: though it was, it bore no relationship to my life. And I tried, for example, at that
[Guest]: time to move to studying sociology, but you weren't allowed to make those moves at that
[Guest]: time. So that's when I took up publishing. And of course, I fell in love with publishing.
[Guest]: But then, and to go back to something you said, as we got more involved in activism,
[Guest]: we also began to realize that we actually knew very little about the issues we were
[Guest]: dealing with. We had no knowledge of them. So opposing dowry deaths and dowry in North
[Guest]: India, what did it mean? I mean, we knew vaguely that, you know, shadiyan hoti hain, dahej
[Guest]: diya jaata hai. That's about it. But how did dowry take the form it had taken? Was it only
[Guest]: actually confined to Hindus? Was it only middle class? Was it rural? Did it cut across religions?
[Guest]: Where we knew nothing about this. So being in publishing, I began to look out for books
[Guest]: that could help us to understand. At that time, the only thing we had access to were
[Guest]: books. We had no Google aunty, no internet, no nothing. There was hardly anything. I remember
[Guest]: one pamphlet by M. N. Srinivas and one book on dowry by two writers, I think called Stanley
[Guest]: and Tambaya or something. So I began to think and I spoke to my bosses. And again, this
[Guest]: is very interesting, that the kind of what you have to confront or what you have to deal
[Guest]: with at an everyday level. My bosses in the OUP were wonderful men, really knowledgeable,
[Guest]: open thinking, generous. I mean, they taught me so much and they gave me every possible
[Guest]: opportunity that could be given to improve my knowledge other than climbing up the ladder
[Guest]: of the job, which they only reserve for the men. But when I talked to them about publishing
[Guest]: books by women and about women, they were befuddled and bewildered. What do women write
[Guest]: and who will read and what are these books about? And are women's issues even legitimate
[Guest]: issues? So that is when I thought, okay, I'm going to do this myself. And that's where
[Guest]: the activism and the publishing seamlessly came together. To me, it was a real stroke
[Guest]: of luck, because where do you get a chance to lead your professional life and be politically
[Guest]: committed and have those two come together? So I have always counted myself really lucky
[Guest]: in this regard. And really took some years, of course, for me to be able to do that. And
[Guest]: it was also, there's another motivation behind it, which was that even though I completely
[Guest]: loved my work and the office and the men and the people I was working with, but it became
[Guest]: very clear to me in three or four years that there would be no upward movement for me if
[Guest]: I stayed on there, as there would be for my male contemporaries. So I was watching all
[Guest]: my male contemporaries, people like Tejeshwar Singh and others just going up the ladder.
[Guest]: And I knew that I was as competent, perhaps more, who knows, as intelligent, perhaps more,
[Guest]: who knows, but that this would never be a possibility. So stepping out and starting
[Guest]: something of your own, that also fitted in actually very nicely with that.
[Amit Varma]: And the report you were referring to earlier is the Towards Equality report in 1974. And
[Amit Varma]: you recite an anecdote about that elsewhere, where you speak about how, you know, you learned
[Amit Varma]: an important lesson from the educational J.P. Naik, who told you that it's not enough just
[Amit Varma]: to have a report out, that you have to hold a press conference while releasing the report,
[Amit Varma]: so that the world gets to know, take control of the narrative. And in general, how important
[Amit Varma]: a lesson do you think that this was, that you can't just do the things that you want
[Amit Varma]: to do, but also think about, you know, building narratives around them, which becomes an especially
[Amit Varma]: important question in this day and age, where there are narrative battles everywhere. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, anybody who wants to do anything, whether you like it or not, you have to think
[Amit Varma]: about sort of this aspect of it. So, you know, what were your learnings there? And in a larger
[Amit Varma]: sense, I also and we'll come back to your publishing, because I want to go into detail
[Amit Varma]: in that. But in a larger sense, when we look at the evolution of, you know, feminism in
[Amit Varma]: India, you know, you've spoken elsewhere again about how, you know, it evolved from street
[Amit Varma]: level activism to building institutions. At the same time, I'm guessing the body of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: which activists had to work with also evolved, including things like how do you build narratives
[Amit Varma]: and how do you, you know, so tell me a little bit about sort of this process of evolving
[Amit Varma]: from well-intentioned people going out on the streets to, you know, building institutions,
[Amit Varma]: building frameworks, getting young people into the fray, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So that J.P. Nayak incident that didn't happen, I was not involved in that. That was Veena
[Guest]: Mazumdar and J.P. Nayak actually advised Veena Mazumdar and other members to hold a press
[Guest]: conference, which they did to put out the findings of that report. And by that time,
[Guest]: when it was a fait accompli and nothing could be done to sit on it, otherwise we might never
[Guest]: have seen that report. So it's actually thanks to that strategy that we actually have this
[Guest]: report in front of us today. And it was able to go to the UN and so on.
[Guest]: Inside the, I mean, that was an important lesson, which Veena passed on to many of us
[Guest]: through, because she was a great support to us when we were setting up Manushi. She provided
[Guest]: space and an umbrella for discussions and such like. And that was her advice to us as
[Guest]: well that, yes, do the things you do, but also talk about them. Now, I don't think we've
[Guest]: been very good at that in some ways. Until recently, I think inside the women's movement,
[Guest]: we have kind of felt that, yeah, we are doing what we are doing and we will continue to
[Guest]: do that. But that is sufficient in itself. Partly it is because much of the time what
[Guest]: we were doing was firefighting, you know, just issues came up, we would react to them
[Guest]: and then they would take up all your energy, then you would do something else and so on.
[Guest]: It's only in recent years, and I think a number of things have come together to build that
[Guest]: sense. One of them is that there are a lot of younger feminists who are hungry for literature,
[Guest]: information, histories that they don't have. And they are questioning that why has there
[Guest]: been so little documentation? Another is that many of us are actually growing older and
[Guest]: we are realizing how much there was that we didn't document. It's not to say that we didn't
[Guest]: do anything. Obviously, we published a lot of books, many others did. Also, the 70s,
[Guest]: the mid 70s were also the time when women's studies came in as a discipline. And India
[Guest]: was in the lead internationally in trying to bring women's studies in. And that enabled
[Guest]: us to study, to find ways of studying areas, which were earlier not seen as legitimate
[Guest]: areas for academic inquiry. That is inside the home, you know, all legitimate academic
[Guest]: inquiry and research focused on the public world. But now it became possible to study
[Guest]: the domestic, the private world, the intimate world. So some literature started also to
[Guest]: be generated from there. And then, of course, you have later the coming of the internet.
[Guest]: So now that women's organizations of a certain kind have been around for a while, they are
[Guest]: all beginning to realize that they also need to house and capture their histories. If you
[Guest]: look at something like a much older organization from the 1920s, the All India Women's Conference,
[Guest]: they have, you know, in a sense become such an established institution that something
[Guest]: like feminism, I don't even know if the meanings of feminism are debated in there, but a hostel
[Guest]: is run for women and all kinds of other things. I think children's home, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: But even now today, they too are feeling the need to document their histories. And so they're
[Guest]: putting them together so that there is a record. And I think there is also another thing that
[Guest]: we became aware of overall, which was the absence of women's stories, the absence of
[Guest]: a trajectory of women's rights in the school curriculum, in academia. So there we were
[Guest]: fighting for women's rights, being out on the streets doing things. But we needed to
[Guest]: see that we needed to be present and visible in other fields as well. And I think that
[Guest]: that realization was then what led to a lot of work trying to get women's histories into
[Guest]: textbooks. So the changes that came about 10 years ago introduced a lot of stuff about
[Guest]: women. Of course, academic books and so on, it's there. And now, of course, in publishing
[Guest]: also you find it. I don't know if that answers your question, because I think somewhere along
[Guest]: the way, I lost track of it.
[Amit Varma]: No, the question was, you know, also how institutions come up and how that changes the landscape.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, once you go from, you know, randomly organized groups of activists to
[Amit Varma]: actual institutions and institution building, I think a different set of incentives also
[Amit Varma]: come into play. And I am, of course, not familiar with the feminist movement and the institutions
[Amit Varma]: therein. But I am familiar with sort of some parts of the social sector. And the danger
[Amit Varma]: that I see is that you will have an NGO come up or an institution built with the very best
[Amit Varma]: of intentions. But then the incentives kick in of fundraising, that you got to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: do your next fundraising round, because that is how you survive. That's what you have to
[Amit Varma]: focus on. And sometimes to raise the funds, there might be one area of work, which is
[Amit Varma]: sexier, so to say, or more in trend than some other area of work. And you have to speak
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of language and you have to go in a particular direction. And the danger
[Amit Varma]: there is that you can lose your original sense of mission or what got you out there. And
[Amit Varma]: of course, it keeps churning because, you know, just as there is culture and there is
[Amit Varma]: counterculture and then the counterculture gets co-opted, but more counterculture comes
[Amit Varma]: up, I assume that that, you know, that wheel sort of keeps on turning. But, you know, so
[Amit Varma]: within your movement, give me a sense of has that been something that is a bit of an issue
[Amit Varma]: where institutions at one level would be a huge advantage in terms of providing the backbone
[Amit Varma]: and the support and the pedagogy for young workers in the field. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: there is a danger of mission creep or not being, not having the flexibility to sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, explore as you would.
[Guest]: Yeah, always. I think that's always there. And that has very much been there in the women's
[Guest]: movement as well. But I think in a sense, the yardstick by which we judge the activities
[Guest]: of women, those that come out of the women's movement, can't be that different from what
[Guest]: we look at elsewhere, because we seem to have a kind of expectation that whatever women
[Guest]: will do will come out perfect and ready. But it's not that, you know, we are also learning
[Guest]: and struggling. So when the first women's institutions or women's groups were set up,
[Guest]: for example, out of the dowry movement grew, anti-dowry movement, grew a need for legal
[Guest]: aid and counselling of people facing issues with dowry. And therefore, legal aid and counselling
[Guest]: centres came up. Out of that movement grew a need for shelter homes. So therefore, a
[Guest]: couple of shelter homes came up. Now, it is completely true that then to keep those institutions
[Guest]: running, other priorities come up, which have to do with funding, which have to do with
[Guest]: other things, which might compromise what you're doing. And that is an occupational
[Guest]: hazard that you have to deal with. I think that it hasn't been an easy thing for feminist
[Guest]: groups to deal with it. But what has helped is always keeping your goal in front of you
[Guest]: and saying this is what we want to do. This is really where we want to go. Now, if you
[Guest]: are if you set up a women's shelter and your funder is saying to you, no, I want you to
[Guest]: do stuff for children, then the choice is very clear. Do you really want to do that?
[Guest]: If you don't want to do that, then you have to go and find other money or you have to
[Guest]: find different ways of running the shelter. I remember an occasion where for the women's
[Guest]: shelter that was being set up in Delhi, the state has schemes by which they provide funds.
[Guest]: And I remember these very tense negotiations going on with the state. I don't recall what
[Guest]: came of it, but I think that the center refused to take money from the state eventually because
[Guest]: one of the things that is required for a women's center is to have its address secret so that
[Guest]: the women can be safe. But in the state documents, they wanted the address everywhere, which
[Guest]: would mean that every clerk, every officer would have access and it could go anywhere
[Guest]: and everywhere. So you couldn't compromise on that. So you had to then give up that kind
[Guest]: of funding. So they are faced with difficult choices like that. And some deal well with
[Guest]: it and some don't. And that I think is with any institutions that you create, some can
[Guest]: manage to hold them to their original ideals and some can't. But I think there's another
[Guest]: thing which is very important, which doesn't get talked about that much, and which is how
[Guest]: to deal with power, how to deal with hierarchy, how to deal with letting go of power, let's
[Guest]: say. So for us, the lessons we learned in the women's movement were the lessons of working
[Guest]: collectively. Now, how do you bring collective functioning to bear on an institution where
[Guest]: the line of responsibility has to be very clear? And so we had to think about, okay,
[Guest]: how do we do this? And that brought up the bigger issue of, let's say, the capitalist
[Guest]: world in which we live. And I don't want to talk in jargon, so I'm just going to say this
[Guest]: once. And the ways in which corporate organisations function, we are saying we reject all of that.
[Guest]: We reject the exploitative dealing with the workers, etc., etc. But are we able to set
[Guest]: up our institutions such that they work effectively and efficiently and can give us the results
[Guest]: that we are looking for? Or do we need to rethink our view and have, let's say, take
[Guest]: what's best out of this corporate world, capitalist world that we don't like and implement it
[Guest]: in ways that tie in with our politics? I think that is a dilemma that many feminist institutions
[Guest]: of my generation of women are dealing with today. Trying to figure out, I mean, I think
[Guest]: in many ways we have kind of understood the business of hierarchy. We have kind of understood
[Guest]: that hierarchies do not get removed and are not so easily wiped out. So better to accept
[Guest]: them and see if we can implement a hierarchy which is democratic, which is transparent,
[Guest]: which is respectful, but which is clear about where the buck stops, where responsibility
[Guest]: lies so that you can actually function. And many are accepting of that. But many have
[Guest]: still not dealt with or come to terms with, okay, how then do you make a transition? I
[Guest]: mean, in Zuban, this is a thing we are grappling with and I deal with it, think about it every
[Guest]: day of my life now. I'm 70 years old. I set up this institution 40 years ago. It has outgrown
[Guest]: me. I can see how it has outgrown me and I can see how it is healthy for it to outgrow
[Guest]: me. And there has to be a way for new leadership to come and for me to be able to exit. And
[Guest]: that has to be a way that is happy for everybody and that works well for the institution. But
[Guest]: many of us are unable to let go. And what is it we are unable to let go of? Is it power?
[Guest]: But we've always said we are against power. So these are the dilemmas and questions that
[Guest]: we are dealing with. And I actually find it very exciting and very interesting because
[Guest]: I think it's in a sense a challenge for us to see how do we deal with this. So when I
[Guest]: think of feminist institution building, I think of the histories, I think of the struggles
[Guest]: within the institution, but I also think of something else that I haven't talked about,
[Guest]: which is also that what does it actually mean to build a feminist institution? And say as
[Guest]: a publishing house, as long as you publish feminist content, is it enough? And you treat
[Guest]: your workers badly and you pay them bad salaries. Is that enough? Or do somewhere you have to
[Guest]: separate the politics from the professional thing and say, OK, these are people working
[Guest]: with me. They need to run their lives, etc. Those are questions also which are very difficult
[Guest]: to confront. And I think institutions are dealing with them. But what is exciting for
[Guest]: me is we are at least talking about them. You know, how many big corporates actually
[Guest]: talk about this? I don't know. Is that structure even set up? Or how many small corporates
[Guest]: talk about this? So to me, that's the value of feminism.
[Amit Varma]: I also sort of want to talk about how any movement, any ideological movement, any movement
[Amit Varma]: like feminism has also been affected by technology in the sense that what has happened in the
[Amit Varma]: last decade and a half, perhaps, is with social media coming up. Social media creates a space
[Amit Varma]: for, you know, what one could call posturing, which is, you know, I've had episodes with
[Amit Varma]: people like Kavita Krishnan and Manjima Bhattacharya, who sort of spoke about this aspect of the
[Amit Varma]: thing also and Kavita being at pains to point out that, you know, real activism is you're
[Amit Varma]: out on the ground, you're doing things, you're doing all of that. But today, it's become
[Amit Varma]: easy for anyone to pose as a feminist just by putting a few angry tweets up and boom,
[Amit Varma]: you're an activist, you're in the cause. And often that will be, you know, accompanied
[Amit Varma]: by all kinds of newfangled theory. But how committed are you really? And when the posturing
[Amit Varma]: happens, the incentives of social media will always drive the posturing towards the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: So you will always be passing judgment on others, because that makes you feel virtuous.
[Amit Varma]: And you will always condemn them for not being pure enough, while the real world is incredibly
[Amit Varma]: messy. And one sort of distressing example for me was when Kamala Bhasin died recently.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, Kamala Bhasin at some point had said something which people felt was politically
[Amit Varma]: incorrect. And there were young feminists who castigated her for that and came out against
[Amit Varma]: her and, you know, ignoring a lifetime of incredible work and all the women she's inspired
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, right, which is just so what do you sort of feel about this because
[Amit Varma]: it is and I think everyone would acknowledge that generational change is good, that young
[Amit Varma]: people bring new ways of looking at things, that you can look at things at intersections
[Amit Varma]: where you couldn't see earlier, you can look at how Dalit women are doing, you can look
[Amit Varma]: at how trans people are doing, all that is great, our gaze is sharper, it's deeper. But
[Amit Varma]: there is also so much sort of posturing, so much anger, so much shrillness, that, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sometimes it can have the opposite impact instead of opening up dialogues instead
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, making the veil fall from, you know, letting layers fall from people's eyes
[Amit Varma]: so they can see the truth for what it is, it can have the impact of sort of pushing
[Amit Varma]: people away. So, you know, what is your sense of this? Like at one point Manjama, who's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, studied feminism and all of that said that, you know, these days, I don't even
[Amit Varma]: like to call myself a feminist because of how the word is, you know, how people think
[Amit Varma]: of the word. So, you know, what's your sense of that?
[Guest]: See, I think, Amit, there are many things over there. One of them is, I think it's always
[Guest]: important to look at history. As we, my generation of people, as feminists, we were lucky in
[Guest]: the sense that as we came into our feminism, we kind of moved into street level activism
[Guest]: on different issues. And there was never a moment where we sat back and said, okay, so
[Guest]: I'm a feminist, now what? You know, whereas today, with the increasing kind of difficulty
[Guest]: of public protest, particular kind of activism, campaigning, etc., if you become, you feel
[Guest]: yourself a feminist, you feel that you're in empathy with the goals of, or whatever,
[Guest]: the thinking of feminism, what do you do? What do you do to actually live that feminism?
[Guest]: We lived it in our political lives and we lived it in our personal lives. And people's
[Guest]: existences these days are so lived on the internet. So then you start sometimes living
[Guest]: your feminism over there. I mean, I often, I'm basing this on my discussions often with
[Guest]: my students who will say to me, so ma'am, now I'm a feminist, but how do I join feminism?
[Guest]: What do I do? And it's a genuine query, because what do you do? There isn't a movement up
[Guest]: there that you can become a member of. You can go and say, okay, I want to join this
[Guest]: or whatever. So how do you actually do this? Nobody really knows. And then, so that's one
[Guest]: thing. And I think another is the kind of space the internet fosters, where instant
[Guest]: expression of something becomes your preferred mode and there's no taking it back. So it
[Guest]: kind of pushes you into taking positions, which you might otherwise on reflection, maybe
[Guest]: put out in a more nuanced way. So I think there is also that. I think there's also a
[Guest]: lot of anger. And I see anger as often as a fairly productive emotion, if you can actually
[Guest]: channel it into discussions and questioning, but sometimes that doesn't happen. And yes,
[Guest]: it is true that that kind of anger and what you call posturing often stops discussion
[Guest]: and dialogue. And you cited the kind of attacks on Kamla as one example of that. And that's
[Guest]: true. Those attacks were extremely hurtful to Kamla. But I think the argument that often
[Guest]: young people make is that you might, suppose it were a man who has been like a wonderful
[Guest]: scholar, thinker, said all the right things, and then you have a case of sexual harassment
[Guest]: against him. Are you going to say, let's forget this, he's done so much in his life, which
[Guest]: is the argument that was used against, I mean, on behalf of many people. So why should we
[Guest]: kind of have different standards? And I think in some ways, it is kind of incumbent upon
[Guest]: those of us who become the targets of this attack to open up the dialogue, to reflect
[Guest]: and say, what have we done wrong, etc., all of that. And to see it as something that can
[Guest]: perhaps lead to a deeper discussion. But I think that requires getting over the hurt,
[Guest]: which is tough, and also sort of telling yourself that this is not personal, but there is a
[Guest]: power equation that's kind of being addressed over here. So after Kamla, that incident happened
[Guest]: with Kamla, I recall, so I wrote a piece in the Indian Express about young women's activism.
[Guest]: And it was written when Natasha and Devangana were released. And I cited many names, but
[Guest]: I made a mistake. It was a mistake. I did not mention the names of young Muslim activists.
[Guest]: I mentioned Fatima Sheikh, who was Savitri Bhai Phule's partner and who helped her set
[Guest]: up schools in the 19th century. But I did not mention Muslim young activists, and I
[Guest]: should have done. And I realized that later, and I tried to do it, you know, before the
[Guest]: article was finalized, but I didn't do it, didn't manage to do it. And initial response
[Guest]: to that piece was very positive. But then I got criticism, some reproach, and some hurt
[Guest]: from young Muslim activists. And there, it was completely justified. I mean, lucky for
[Guest]: me that they couched it in terms of disappointment, rather than anger. But it wasn't that the
[Guest]: disappointment didn't pinch or hurt. But they were right. And, you know, my generation of
[Guest]: people, so my colleagues were very upset about this. And they said, you must respond. And
[Guest]: I said, no, no, I, you know, I've written what I've written, and they've said what they've
[Guest]: said etc. But they said, no, you have to do them the respect of responding. So I did respond
[Guest]: just a line on our website, because I'm not on social media otherwise, just to say that
[Guest]: I'm sorry, and it was a mistake. And thanks for pointing it out. And I'll make sure I
[Guest]: don't do it again. But in a sense, I think that you have to engage then, it's like somebody
[Guest]: attacks you, then either you just ignore that attack, or you say, okay, why? And I think
[Guest]: if you say why you keep the dialogue open, but it's not easy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of my friends who runs a sort of a discussion group has a ground rule for
[Amit Varma]: the group, which I hold to in fact, be a great ground rule for all interactions, which is
[Amit Varma]: assume goodwill, right. And what I find sometimes happening is that young people today and these
[Amit Varma]: are the shallower sort of young people who are into signaling and posturing online are
[Amit Varma]: not really looking for true discussion, they're looking for a gotcha moment. So they can,
[Amit Varma]: you know, be outraged and they can display their own virtue and they can embrace victimhood
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. In your case, these guys might have been polite, but for a lot
[Amit Varma]: of people, they get attacked in ways that are not polite, you can have a mob coming
[Amit Varma]: down on you. And I think the sort of the decent thing to do is assume goodwill, like if you
[Amit Varma]: hadn't put in the name of a Muslim activist, the default assumption should be not that
[Amit Varma]: she is biased against them, but that she just forgot, you know, that should be the default
[Amit Varma]: assumption. And then you can express your hurt that hey, we weren't included in a pleasant
[Amit Varma]: way. And I'm guessing these guys were polite enough. And and then you respond and I completely
[Amit Varma]: agree with that. But what I often see happening is that mobs come down on you, because people
[Amit Varma]: are just looking for those gotcha moments. And that fundamental principle that I would
[Amit Varma]: like to see put in place of assume goodwill, you know, until you actually have concrete
[Amit Varma]: reason to believe otherwise, but just assume goodwill, you know, and you can have good
[Amit Varma]: natured dialogues, you can have polite conversation. But you know, one doesn't see enough of that.
[Amit Varma]: And even in Kamala's case, I think that the judgments passed on her were uncharitable
[Amit Varma]: and harsh for that reason. I'm not saying that if someone does something wrong, you
[Amit Varma]: should excuse them on the basis of having done good things before. I mean that you can
[Amit Varma]: excuse anything with that. I agree with you on that. But I just personally felt that those
[Amit Varma]: judgments felt harsh and uncharitable. And sometimes we just need to kind of take a step
[Amit Varma]: back, have the dialogue, say the things that need to be said. But, you know, in that spirit
[Amit Varma]: of we are all in this together and you know, until you have reason to believe otherwise.
[Guest]: Yeah, I agree on that. But I also think that and you're right to say that, you know, there
[Guest]: are mob attacks and the Internet is a very toxic space very often. But, she, if we just
[Guest]: if we talk about the statement on Kamala, yeah, what I wanted to say was, it wasn't
[Guest]: only young people and it's never only young people. It's so in a sense, starring young
[Guest]: people with that brush is not entirely fair. And in that letter, there were I don't know
[Guest]: how many signatories, 900 or so signatories to it. There were many, many older feminists
[Guest]: also, many people that I know who had also signed it. The second thing is you're right
[Guest]: to say that, yes, the person has done so much, etc. in the past. All that is true. But many
[Guest]: people may not know that. So, I don't know how many of the people who would have signed
[Guest]: that statement would have been aware of Kamala's history. And if they had just listened to
[Guest]: what she said in that little clip that was circulating, I suppose on that they could
[Guest]: build a case of tremendous anger. So, I'm not making an excuse. I'm just trying to see
[Guest]: where this is coming from and why it takes the form that it does. And it could just be
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about your publishing years also, which is so sort of inspiring. And you worked
[Amit Varma]: at OUP, you worked in OUP in Delhi, then you worked at OUP in London. And you know, you worked in Z books in London
[Amit Varma]: doing, you know, working in a similar area. But then you came back and in 1984, you founded
[Amit Varma]: Kali for Women with Ritu Menon. So, tell me a bit about where that came from that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, having sort of, in those years, the audacity to say that I'll do a startup, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and I'll do this kind of startup, which you know, is not going to scale and be incredibly
[Amit Varma]: profitable. But I will do this because it needs to be done because at a fundamental
[Amit Varma]: level also, therefore, and correct me if I'm wrong, but Kali for Women would seem to be
[Amit Varma]: different from all other publishing houses in the sense that other publishing houses
[Amit Varma]: would be set up to maybe find people who are already writing on subjects that are already
[Amit Varma]: written about. So, it's kind of more of the same, there is a market, you're chasing the
[Amit Varma]: market, but it seems to me that what would have animated you guys would be that nobody
[Amit Varma]: is doing this, it needs to be done, we'll create the market, you know, we'll ask people
[Amit Varma]: to write for us, these stories don't exist, they would not exist without us, we'll be
[Amit Varma]: the catalyst. So, is that a correct characterization? And tell me a little bit then about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what drove you to do it and your early days, were there self doubts? What was that period
[Guest]: like? You know, when I look back on it now, I don't understand how I could have done it.
[Guest]: I was 32 years old, you know, at 32 you give up a job and start something new with no money.
[Guest]: Where does that kind of foolishness come from? And I think what was it that sort of, you
[Guest]: know, you're so bindas ke ho jayega, kisi na kisi tarah se ho jayega. And one of the
[Guest]: things I know today with 40 years of this thing behind me is that in moments of despair,
[Guest]: and of course there are moments of despair because publishing the kind of stuff we do
[Guest]: is very hard. And you never know from one year to the next whether you're going to survive
[Guest]: and we have no buffer, no backup. And I despair now and again, you know, I have made one or
[Guest]: two or three maybe attempts to try and stabilize the publishing we are doing by trying to get
[Guest]: in somebody to invest in it so that we have a little bit of money, a little bit of backing.
[Guest]: And nobody has ever shown interest in investing. None of my friends, none of these good friends
[Guest]: I know who have invested their life savings in publishing, but they will not put it into
[Guest]: women's publishing. So often when I'm trying that and it doesn't work and I despair, then
[Guest]: I think, you know, we've survived 40 years without any money. We have only survived on
[Guest]: our wits and on the little money that we earn. And we publish damn good books. So it's how
[Guest]: have we been able to do that? Maybe that is enough to feel happy about. So that's just
[Guest]: when I look back on it. But yes, I don't know what gave me the courage to do it. But certainly
[Guest]: the motivation was, as I told you before, that recognizing that there was a huge gap
[Guest]: in the knowledge available to us and knowledge about women and seeing that nobody was willing
[Guest]: to fill that gap. And so thinking, OK, I'll do it myself. But of course, and in the initial
[Guest]: years, it was just me. Ritu joined up a little later. Of course, thinking about it was one
[Guest]: thing, doing it was quite another. So I started thinking about it quite early on and I didn't
[Guest]: actually do it. I kept talking myself into it. That's how I do things. I just talk myself
[Guest]: into it. So and then in the middle of all of that came this unexpected interruption
[Guest]: that in the form of a Fulbright fellowship to go to the United States and study there.
[Guest]: And so when you're 30, that's what I was at that time. You don't say no to a Fulbright
[Guest]: fellowship to the U.S. So I was actually on my way there when and I stopped in London
[Guest]: to spend a little time there and met with people from Z Books who I knew, the editor
[Guest]: from Z Books, Robert Maltino, who passed away recently. Robert had come to India and he'd
[Guest]: met me and we chatted. He knew some friends of mine and everything. And they said, why
[Guest]: are you going to Hawaii? You don't know how to swim. You don't know how to surf. Why don't
[Guest]: you just stay here and work with us? And that was the aha moment for me because I thought
[Guest]: this is what I really want to do. Why am I going to Hawaii? So I gave up on that and
[Guest]: stayed on and worked there. And it was towards the end of that stint by which time I had
[Guest]: talked so much about this that there was nothing else I could do but start it. Ritu got in
[Guest]: touch. She was with Vikas at that time and she wanted to opt out and she was starting
[Guest]: to publish a few books about women. So we knew each other professionally. We were not
[Guest]: friends or anything because there were a handful of women in publishing at that time. So she
[Guest]: then said, it sounds very interesting. Let's join up. And why don't we do this together?
[Guest]: And we decided to do that together. So we had no money and we both gave up our jobs
[Guest]: or not quite gave up our jobs, continued to do them to earn a little bit of money, but
[Guest]: started this on the side and then gradually we gave them up. And Ritu's husband provided
[Guest]: us with their garage and he set it up for us and we opened an office. Now, our idea
[Guest]: was to publish books by women and about women. And we went out to seek women writers because,
[Guest]: of course, very few of them were getting published. So there was no writers that you could draw
[Guest]: on. As you yourself said, most publishing houses publish known writers. We were completely
[Guest]: breaking new ground. Nobody could understand what we were talking about. And we started
[Guest]: with two or three books that we had in our head, went out to seek writers. One of the
[Guest]: interesting things we found was that women themselves had very little confidence in their
[Guest]: writing. So the thing that we had to do was to work with them, to talk to them, to tell
[Guest]: them that actually what you have to say is worth saying and convince them of that. And
[Guest]: that's how we would sort of manage to get books from them. And we started with just
[Guest]: two books and then it slowly grew to a few more. We weren't paying ourselves anything.
[Guest]: We had no rent to pay. So we had very low overheads and we had no employees. We got
[Guest]: one employee much later at, I think, 700 rupees a month, a young man called Joes Anthony,
[Guest]: who was in despair because he used to get letters addressed to Miss Joes Anthony, which
[Guest]: used to give us a lot to laugh about because we would tell him, you know, now you know
[Guest]: what we faced all our lives because we are forever called Mr. Battaglia, Mr. Menon. And
[Guest]: then it slowly grew with some help from a bunch of women who helped us to locate authors,
[Guest]: but also because we had so much support from within the women's movement. You know, people
[Guest]: recognize Kali as being their publishing house, bringing out books for them. So they would,
[Guest]: you know, go and ask, oh, when is the next Kali book coming out, etc. And people would
[Guest]: be really surprised because it was like saying, I mean, nobody asks for books by their publisher
[Guest]: except for Mills and Boone romances, you know, and we couldn't have been at a further distance
[Guest]: from them. So that really was how it started in the early days. We did a bit of Jugaad.
[Guest]: We found out our skills as editors, we earned money, we put it into Kali and slowly the
[Guest]: list grew over a period of time. And because we kept the overheads low, it paid for itself
[Guest]: in the beginning. I mean, whatever little we earned could go towards paying the costs.
[Guest]: Later, it became more difficult because things became more expensive and we had to think
[Amit Varma]: of other ways of doing it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this lovely story about this book that I heard of for the first time, but I
[Amit Varma]: can't wait to kind of find it and look at it, which you published in 1989 called Shareer
[Amit Varma]: Ki Jankari. And it was written by these 75 women who came to you. And it was really a
[Amit Varma]: book that, you know, showed a woman in a lehenga and you lift different parts of the lehenga
[Amit Varma]: and there are different body parts and explanations about them, demystifying the body as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you have this nice anecdote about how you had to find a new printer because
[Amit Varma]: the boys at your regular printer would get excited by all this lehenga lifting. So you
[Amit Varma]: had to find a printer which had women employees who would presumably get less excited. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how well did that book do, for example, and commercially, was it viable on its own,
[Amit Varma]: like quite apart from the fact that, of course, you're not paying rent, you're in the garage,
[Amit Varma]: overheads are low, you have one employee, Miss Jose. And, you know, so at what point
[Amit Varma]: did it sort of become a viable business on its own? And did you get the sense that we
[Amit Varma]: are growing a market? We are not just publishing books that don't exist, but we are growing
[Amit Varma]: a market of people who want such books and then that demand will create its own supply.
[Amit Varma]: Did you get a sense that, you know, by getting the first few books like that out there, you
[Amit Varma]: were inspiring others to write for you because now there was something to look at and say
[Guest]: ki haan, yeh hai? Yeah, well, that book, Sharir Ki Jankari, that was, so that book was very
[Guest]: significant for us in many ways. To me, it still remains one of the most important books
[Guest]: we've done because in a sense, when we started to publish, even though we were quite convinced
[Guest]: that we wanted to publish diverse voices, and one of our first books was a book of translations
[Guest]: of seven short stories from different Indian languages, where Mahasweta Devi was published
[Guest]: for the first time in English, her adult work, she didn't, she wasn't as well known, and
[Guest]: Ismat Chugtai also. So even though we wanted to do that, it was also clear to us after
[Guest]: a few years, that really, the women we were publishing, it was important to bring out
[Guest]: their voices, but they came from our class. And as feminist publishers, we needed to reach
[Guest]: out much further, we couldn't be in a country like India, we couldn't be part of a movement
[Guest]: that was so diverse, and really be publishing only the cream of the thing. So how to reach
[Guest]: out, we didn't know how to do that, really, we're thinking about it. And then this book
[Guest]: came to us. And these were women who had been part of the Women's Development Programme
[Guest]: of the Rajasthan government, the central government and the Rajasthan government together. And
[Guest]: they had created this book in workshops, health workshops, and they brought it to us. And
[Guest]: they told us this story, which I never tired of telling, which is that they experimented,
[Guest]: they created two books by hand, and they experimented with it in the village. And that's when people
[Guest]: laughed at them and said, you know, it's not a realistic book, because you never see a
[Guest]: naked woman or a naked man in a village. So you've shown naked bodies, how can this be
[Guest]: realistic? And that's when they went back and thought about it, and then came up with
[Guest]: this ingenious idea of creating a fully dressed woman, and a man dressed in the dhoti and
[Guest]: with his chest bare, and then you can lift up the dhoti or you can lift up the lehenga
[Guest]: and you see how the woman is made from inside. And that's, and then we, you know, our printer
[Guest]: did that book, and then all his little boys in the bindery were looking at these things.
[Guest]: So we had to find a group of women binders, which one of my colleagues found for us, she
[Guest]: traveled all around Delhi and found for us. So that book, actually, we've not sold a single
[Guest]: copy through a bookshop. It always went to women at the village level. So we initially
[Guest]: printed 2000 copies. Before we had finished printing, the women had pre-sold 1800 copies.
[Guest]: And we later did more and more. And to this day, I've lost count, but I think between
[Guest]: 75 to 80,000 have been printed. And we've never lost money on it, but we've never made
[Guest]: money on it. We've kind of broken even. Every copy has gone either to an NGO or to women's
[Guest]: groups and others. It's been translated into a few languages. It's been pirated. I think
[Guest]: at one time it was even pirated by a government, because they ordered 22,000 copies from us.
[Guest]: And then they came back and said, why can't we print it ourselves? And we said, no, you
[Guest]: can't because it's our copyright. And then they canceled the order. So I think they went
[Guest]: ahead and printed it anyway, but who knows. So that book opened particular doors to us
[Guest]: and also made us rethink. I've also talked about this often. The women imposed two conditions
[Guest]: on us for that book. One was that we would never make a profit from it. Not that we would
[Guest]: never make a profit, that we would never sell a copy to a village woman at a profit. She
[Guest]: would get it at cost and we could sell it in the market otherwise. The second was that
[Guest]: they all 75 of their names must appear as authors on the book. And because this was
[Guest]: a collectively sourced, collectively written book. So eventually, of course we did, we
[Guest]: were foxed by this demand, but we put all 75 names on the back and the front cover doesn't
[Guest]: have any names on it. So that opened many doors and made us rethink many of our assumptions.
[Guest]: And yes, we did have the sense that we were creating a market. It was very clear because
[Guest]: interest was growing and therefore our publishing was also growing. At which point did it become
[Guest]: viable? Well, in the early years, actually, even though we didn't have any funding, I
[Guest]: mean, any investment or anything in it, we did have some funding. We got, I think a grant
[Guest]: or something of maybe one lakh in the first year. And then we did this jugaad of doing
[Guest]: different kinds of work and earning money and adding that. So for every freelance job
[Guest]: we did, we would earn money for one book and we would put it into Kali. And then we went
[Guest]: to the people who had given us funding for this one book and went back to them and said,
[Guest]: look, we are now at a point where we think if we can make the leap into being a little
[Guest]: bit self-sufficient, but we need a little bit of money. And would you be willing to
[Guest]: give us that and not tie it to specific books, but to a number of books? So they agreed and
[Guest]: we got about four lakhs from them. And we published those books that came out of that
[Guest]: money. I think by about year six or seven, we were breaking even. And some years we made
[Guest]: a small profit, but small profit was like one lakh, two lakhs, maybe three lakhs. That's
[Guest]: it. And then, of course, we split in after 19 years of working together, we split. But
[Guest]: up until the time that we were working together, I don't think we ever made a loss. We just
[Guest]: managed to cover our costs and we didn't need to bring in other forms of money to keep it
[Guest]: going. But subsequently, we have had a much more difficult time, because what started
[Guest]: to happen was by about year seven or eight, when it became clear that there was a market,
[Guest]: the profile of publishing had also changed in India and was changing a little more. So
[Guest]: the big companies started to come in because when we started, there was nobody. Penguin
[Guest]: came in three years after us as an independent publisher. And then a few others came in.
[Guest]: And then gradually, I think it was, would have been early 90s or something like that.
[Guest]: I forget. Yeah, early 90s, when companies, the larger companies began to come in. And
[Guest]: then they all spotted that opportunity that, OK, here is a publisher who's created this
[Guest]: space. Here are authors. And so they started to take the authors away. So which, of course,
[Guest]: is in the fitness of things, because authors must go, I suppose, where they get more money
[Guest]: and more exposure. But it was tough to deal with. You do all the groundwork of sort of
[Guest]: locating a writer, bringing them to public attention, and then somebody who has much
[Guest]: more resources than you creams it off. It took us a while to be philosophical about
[Guest]: that, stop feeling angry about it. But that was what happened. And that is also what made
[Guest]: it a little difficult for us to keep making that investment of finding new people and
[Guest]: then knowing that they would go away. And economically, it's not a good model, but it's,
[Amit Varma]: I suppose, what we've chosen to do. And, you know, even though you say that we always made
[Amit Varma]: a profit or we at least broke even, the truth is, when you think of what economists call
[Amit Varma]: opportunity cost, what could you have done instead? And instead, I'm sure both of you
[Amit Varma]: individually could have made far more money in other ventures, and yet you chose to do
[Amit Varma]: this. And therefore, it is like a labor of love. And sometimes I think about that and
[Amit Varma]: other similar labors of love. And it strikes me that when you are creating value in the
[Amit Varma]: world, there should be a I mean, I would imagine in my idealistic way, that you should be able
[Amit Varma]: to get that money back and make profits and so on. I mean, one of the changes I see in
[Amit Varma]: the creator economy in the last three or four years is that people can actually with their
[Amit Varma]: labors of love without being dependent on mainstream platforms or gatekeepers or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: make enough money to get by and be independent and and myself being an example of that in
[Amit Varma]: a sense. So, you know, when you sort of look here now at 2022, like you, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: guys split and you founded Zuban in 2003. You even had a big hit with Baby Haldar's
[Amit Varma]: A Lifeless Ordinary, among many other books that were coming out. But now when you look
[Amit Varma]: back at what technology has done with technology, in a sense, to some extent has dissipated
[Amit Varma]: attention, you know, maybe people with creative urges, women creators can find that there
[Amit Varma]: are other ways in which they can express themselves and tell their stories and not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: write a book or do it in print. You know, when you look at the landscape today, what
[Amit Varma]: do you think? Like, do you think that if you were young today, if you were 20 today, would
[Amit Varma]: you necessarily start a publishing house which would bring out books or would you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: would there be other things that would excite you? What's what's your sense of this?
[Guest]: Well, I think even at 70, there are lots of other things that excite me. I'm sorry, I
[Guest]: didn't mean to make it sound like that. No, no, no. I couldn't resist that. But no, but
[Guest]: you're right. I think if I was to start something today, it certainly wouldn't be only books.
[Guest]: I think one of our and by our, I mean the collective community of publishers, not just
[Guest]: us in Zuban. One of our failings has been that we have been so reluctant to let go of
[Guest]: the printed book, giving it a permanence, which actually historically, when you look
[Guest]: at the development of publishing, you see how the form of the book has changed over
[Guest]: the years. So from being on, let's say, palm leaf manuscripts or vellum, which we didn't
[Guest]: have in India because it was the skin of the calf, it has moved to paper. So when it moved
[Guest]: to paper in about the 18th or 19th century, it moved for different reasons. And one of
[Guest]: the reasons for moving away from, say, vellum was how much, how many skins you needed to
[Guest]: make one book, so how many animals needed to be killed to make one book. And it moved
[Guest]: to paper. Paper was seen at that time as an impermanent, fragile material. Now we see
[Guest]: it as a given and we see it as something that has permanence. But now what is happening,
[Guest]: I think, is another historical development, which is that we are moving away from paper.
[Guest]: And in the move away from paper, it's again in the fitness of things, because paper destroys
[Guest]: so many forests, needs so much water, so much though I love the form and shape of the book.
[Guest]: And there's nothing quite like the sense of holding a book and reading it. I also know
[Guest]: that this is something that we have to rethink. And that there are other ways of putting out
[Guest]: knowledge and information. And that we have to think creatively about how we can survive
[Guest]: on those other ways, exactly like you say. So I think we're at the cusp of thinking about
[Guest]: that. I don't have any ideas. I know that this is something we have to think about.
[Guest]: And that's why I also feel a sense of urgency for, you know, people of my age to find a
[Guest]: mode of exit, because then you kind of liberate the thinking and more possibilities and opportunities
[Guest]: can come up. So I hope that that's going to happen, because the thing is that whatever
[Guest]: form or shape it takes, as long as people read, that's the important thing. And as long
[Guest]: as we can keep putting out content, feminist content, content about women, then how does
[Guest]: it matter what form or shape you put it in? I'll still have my bookshelf, you know, till
[Guest]: the day I die, and then it'll go to somebody else. But that's the thing we have to think
[Guest]: about.
[Amit Varma]: That's the circle of life and growth. Let's sort of talk also about the books that you've
[Amit Varma]: written and the work that you've done. And I was particularly sort of fascinated by,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all the work you've done on partition, including the other side of silence. And so
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about how your interest in that came about. I mean, I know you were
[Amit Varma]: researching for some film project, and then you kind of started looking into this. And
[Amit Varma]: then it just grew and grew and grew and took a life of its own. So tell me a bit about
[Amit Varma]: what drove you to, you know, sort of explore these areas. And of course, your mother had
[Amit Varma]: her own stories. It was your Anna Mama, which is a story with which you begin the book.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, was there that personal history sort of driving the process? Or were you just
[Amit Varma]: sort of, as soon as you started discovering these stories, you couldn't help yourself
[Amit Varma]: but dive into these rabbit holes? What was that like?
[Guest]: Well, there were two or three things that actually opened up this area for me or made
[Guest]: me start thinking about it. One was that film I talk about, which was a film that a documentary
[Guest]: that was being made by two friends of mine, a guy called Peter Chappell, and another guy
[Guest]: called Sati Khanna. So Sati apparently wanted to make a film on people's memories of partition.
[Guest]: And Peter is a cameraman and director, and they got together. And they were coming to
[Guest]: India to do the shooting. And they got in touch with me because Peter's then partner
[Guest]: and Peter and I were good friends. He and his partner and I were good friends. So Peter
[Guest]: then asked me if I would be willing to help them with a bit of research because even though
[Guest]: they were coming, they hadn't actually done the research to identify people to talk to.
[Guest]: So I did a bit of that. And the area I started to hear very interesting stories. I traveled
[Guest]: to Amritsar, I went to Karnal, I talked to people in Delhi, I went to Kanpur, I think
[Guest]: a few other places and started listening to stories. So something started, you know, raising
[Guest]: questions about this in my mind. And I've always liked to listen to stories. And just
[Guest]: around that time, I think a little bit previously, I had worked on another film, which was with
[Guest]: Salman Rushdie, very interesting. So Rushdie, not many people know this, was making a documentary,
[Guest]: the first documentary he made on Children of Midnight, because later he went on to make
[Guest]: another one. And this was the first one he made with a director called Jeff Dunlop. And
[Guest]: for some reason, Dunlop got in touch with me and asked if I could help them to identify
[Guest]: people across India for this film. And I said no, because we were also in the throes of
[Guest]: setting up Kali. And then he said, okay, could I just help them to look in Delhi. So I did
[Guest]: that for them. And again, I found a few people in Chandni Chowk and other places. And again,
[Guest]: that kind of opened up, you know, just stories about the moment of independence, although
[Guest]: these were people who were born on the 15th of August. So they didn't have any memory
[Guest]: of that time, but just that mahal and that context. And then, of course, came Indira
[Guest]: Gandhi's assassination. So that was the real catalyst. Because when she was assassinated
[Guest]: and the city became like something I had never seen with the kind of lurking violence beneath
[Guest]: the surface, which in the kind of sheltered existence that I had led here as a middle
[Guest]: class woman, I had never suspected that it could be there. And suddenly I could see it.
[Guest]: We, you know, we walked out of our home and you could see buses lying, carcasses of buses
[Guest]: on the road, tires burning and all of that. And the city came to a standstill, really,
[Guest]: because the administration just collapsed. And lots of citizens got together to set up
[Guest]: this group called Nagrek Ekta Manch, which kind of spontaneously came together. And they
[Guest]: used to meet at Lajpat Bhavan every day. And they got permission from the police to work
[Guest]: in the places where affected people were and to try and provide relief and that kind of
[Guest]: thing. So we all joined up. And my group of five or six people was assigned the Shakarpur
[Guest]: camp, which was across the river near Gita Colony in a school. So people in Shakarpur
[Guest]: who had been badly impacted, they were all moved from their houses into a school, which
[Guest]: was closed at that time because it was Dussehra vacation. So I worked there and my specific
[Guest]: task was to take down people's stories for compensation claims and such like. And that
[Guest]: is the first time that I started hearing about partition with people just eliding the two,
[Guest]: you know, saying it was like partition again. And then they were talking about 84, but they
[Guest]: were talking about 47 actually. And it just kept coming back and back. And I started to
[Guest]: think about it. And that's really when I also started to talk to my mother for the first
[Guest]: time to see what was it like. And we'd heard her stories all the time, but just ignored
[Guest]: them. And she was also surprised to hear of this interest, but gradually she began to
[Guest]: open up about it. And then I took the decision that I was going to go and see my uncle in
[Guest]: Pakistan. And it took until that time, I had no idea of a book in mind. I just wanted to,
[Guest]: you know, talk to him and see him. And it wasn't until much later that I started thinking
[Guest]: of writing a book. Initially, listening to my uncle's story, bringing it back to my mother
[Guest]: and her siblings, their resentment, their anger, then turning it to, you know, affection,
[Guest]: love, all of that. I watched all of that in fascination. And I started just talking to
[Guest]: people randomly. It was completely a random thing. Any academic would trash it saying
[Guest]: there was no sample, there was nothing. I just went from story to story. One person
[Guest]: told me something and said, talk to this one, then I would go there. And I became like these
[Guest]: antennae, you know, I would be walking somewhere and I would see two people, one person looking
[Guest]: that age, and I'd go up to them and say, where are you from? And they would, I learned to
[Guest]: recognize this question they answered with in Punjabi saying, hune ya piche, meaning
[Guest]: now or then, and realize how time was divided in their mind according to before partition
[Guest]: or after partition. And so people were generous. They told me stories. It wasn't until much
[Guest]: later that I started recording them. But once I started recording them, then it kind of
[Guest]: added up. And then I discovered this gurdwara in Jangpura, where the survivors of the March
[Guest]: 1947 Rawalpindi attack had come and they had settled in Jangpura. And I used to live in
[Guest]: Jangpura when I came to Delhi in the early days and didn't know anything about this.
[Guest]: But then went to the gurdwara where every year on the 13th of March, they have a ceremony
[Guest]: to remember the survivors of partition. And from there I got to know a lot of families
[Guest]: and talk to them. So it was just like that. But also it was not concentrated research.
[Guest]: You know, it was spread over 10 years because I was working and I had no funding for it
[Guest]: because I was not doing it through some academic thing. So there would be months when I would
[Guest]: do nothing. And then I'd hear a story and I'd go and talk to that person and that would
[Guest]: become an ongoing interaction. So on all academic counts, it was completely the wrong thing
[Guest]: to do. You know, research spread over a long period, random stories, no pattern, no sample,
[Guest]: no nothing. But at some point I decided who cares about academics? I can't be bothered.
[Guest]: This is a story I want to tell. So I told it in my way.
[Amit Varma]: You know, earlier in this conversation, you referred to Heer Ranjha and in the context
[Amit Varma]: of your writings on partition, you also reproduce this beautiful poem by Amrita Pritam called
[Amit Varma]: I Ask You, Varisha. And of course, the author of Heer Ranjha. And I'll just sort of read
[Amit Varma]: that out because I love it so much. Let your voice rise from within your grave. When one
[Amit Varma]: Heer died in Punjab, you penned an epic lament. Now that hundreds of Heers are being violated,
[Amit Varma]: why are you silent, Varisha? I ask you, Varisha, let your voice rise from within your grave.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And to me, you know, this poem is as important for us to understand partition
[Amit Varma]: and what it did as a historical document would be, as an academic paper would be. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in your essay for the latest edition of the book, you spoke about how you realized
[Amit Varma]: that you would have to go beyond academics and beyond history to understand and document
[Amit Varma]: partition. You know, you cited James Young, who, you know, was writing about the Holocaust
[Amit Varma]: and how do we remember the Holocaust? And his point was that we have to go past history.
[Amit Varma]: We have to, quote, know the Holocaust through its literary, fictional, historical, political
[Amit Varma]: representations, and through his personal testimonial representations, for it is not
[Amit Varma]: only the facts of any event that are important, but equally how people remember those facts
[Amit Varma]: and how they represent them. Stop quote. And I found this wonderful fluidity in all your
[Amit Varma]: writing on partition as well, where, you know, just as you've been courteous enough to avoid
[Amit Varma]: jargon in our conversation today is written in simple language, as your early teacher
[Amit Varma]: advised you in college is written from the heart. And so what was then your approach
[Amit Varma]: towards form? Was it something that you arrived at organically over a period of time that
[Amit Varma]: I let the story tell itself and all of that? And or, you know, did you start with a particular
[Amit Varma]: conception key, you know, the academic point of view one might have thought about, or this
[Amit Varma]: is history, I have to tell it, like another thing that I really liked in your work is
[Amit Varma]: that you weren't hesitant of putting the I in there, putting the personal in there, this
[Amit Varma]: was your journey, discovering all of this, and you put that in there. And that makes
[Amit Varma]: it so much richer for me. Whereas, you know, conventional historians or journalists might
[Amit Varma]: say don't use the I and all that. But you're engaging with all of this, because this is
[Amit Varma]: a living history also. So tell me a bit about, you know, how you evolved to your approach
[Guest]: towards this. So Amit, you know, as I said that the research and thinking and writing
[Guest]: and talking to people was quite random. Then there came a point when I took all the material
[Guest]: I had. And one of the things that I made sure I did was I transcribed each interview myself.
[Guest]: I didn't want somebody else to do it for me. I knew the material, I knew the people, I
[Guest]: wanted to be close to them. So I transcribed everything myself. And I just let the material
[Guest]: sit there and steep until it could suggest a pattern to me. It wasn't easy because I
[Guest]: thought of many things. And one of the things that I thought of was that I would include,
[Guest]: you know, the full text of all the interviews and let them speak for themselves. But then
[Guest]: I changed my mind about that. And it was my editor at Penguin also who advised me on that
[Guest]: and said, don't do that because the interviews will start sounding alike after a while. And
[Guest]: that was true. So eventually, I think what I did was that four or five of those interviews,
[Guest]: I decided were the ones that were going to inform what I was doing. And quite honestly,
[Guest]: I didn't know until I started writing it what form it would take. All I had in front of
[Guest]: me was the Rana Mama chapter, which I had written and which had been published in Granta.
[Guest]: So in a sense, that was both enabling and quite defeating because that chapter, you
[Guest]: know, was there as a done thing. Now, could I change it? Could I expand on it? Should
[Guest]: I just leave it? What should I do with it? And then I decided that, OK, I would append
[Guest]: my mother's interview to it. And suddenly that structure revealed itself to me. And
[Guest]: that was what led me to using basically one detailed interview with each chapter that
[Guest]: I did. I didn't know that. I mean, I didn't know when I started writing whether the interview
[Guest]: would appear at the beginning of the chapter or at the end of the chapter. And as you may
[Guest]: have seen, I do all of that. In one chapter, it appears at the end. Another one, it is
[Guest]: the beginning. Another one, it goes right through the chapter. So I just let that thing
[Guest]: work itself organically, really. Some of the things you do, you don't realize. So for example,
[Guest]: until one of the readers of my book, when it went to an American publisher, they sent
[Guest]: it to an academic to read. And that academic wrote a report. And one of the things she
[Guest]: pointed out in it was that every chapter starts with a single has a single word title. I didn't
[Guest]: know this. You know, I had just done the titles. It was not a conscious thing. When she said
[Guest]: that, I thought, oh, wow, yes, it does. You know, suddenly something kind of revealed
[Guest]: itself to me in that. But I think the structure really just grew organically. When I look
[Guest]: back on it now, I mean, like when I was talking to you about Kali and saying when I look back
[Guest]: at it, I don't know how I had the courage to do that. When I look back on this now,
[Guest]: I do not know how I wrote this book in the interstices of time that I had, because I
[Guest]: was fully occupied in my job in Kali and working on it. And it was long work days. But I would
[Guest]: come home and then I would sit down with it in the time that I had and write it. And that
[Guest]: sometimes that time was half an hour. Sometimes it was an hour. Sometimes it was a little
[Guest]: more. And at the end of it, I don't know how it flows like that. But perhaps it's because
[Guest]: it was just a very deeply felt book.
[Amit Varma]: This is lovely, reflective para in your new introduction to the latest edition, where
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, everything is different. The person you were when you wrote the book,
[Amit Varma]: the context in which it was thought about and written, the viewpoint from which you
[Amit Varma]: are looking at it today. If you as author are different, so too is the external environment
[Amit Varma]: in which the work took root and shape. So much has changed in 20 years. If in the India
[Amit Varma]: of two decades ago, the fault lines of our nation state were beginning to become visible.
[Amit Varma]: Today, the divisions are full blown and growing, stop quote. And I won't ask you about the
[Amit Varma]: environment and the fault lines and all of that. What really interests me is how you
[Amit Varma]: talk about how you changed the person that you were changed. And I'll ask you this a
[Amit Varma]: larger question, not just in the context of the book, but throughout this journey, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how what are the ways in which you have changed as compared to say, the 20 year old,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Urvashi, like when you kind of look back at that person, you know, what are the
[Amit Varma]: different ways in which you've changed the things you've learned? And what is there,
[Amit Varma]: which is essential to you, which was at the core of that person then and is at the core
[Amit Varma]: of this person today?
[Guest]: My feminism, it's what I breathe, what I live, what I believe in, what I try to practice.
[Guest]: And I'm not just saying it like that, you know, it's a question for me, in every action
[Guest]: I take in my life. How do I deal with people? How do I listen, learn to listen more and
[Guest]: more and learn to reflect on what I'm listening to and take action only after that, etc. So
[Guest]: that the feminism is has remained at the core of all of this. I wish, hope, think, imagine
[Guest]: that what I have lived is a feminist life to the best of my ability. But of course,
[Guest]: that's not something that I can judge myself.
[Guest]: What has changed? Well, I think everybody changes, which is a cliche, of course, I have
[Guest]: become much less of an angry young woman. But that change started coming into my life
[Guest]: long before I became a feminist. I used to be, I still think back, I used to be a really
[Guest]: bad tempered, angry person and would shout and scream and lose my temper and bang doors
[Guest]: and all of those things. And I still remember that when I was 12 years old, my elder brother
[Guest]: sat me down and gave me a lecture on this and said, why do you do this? And the funny
[Guest]: thing is that he is extremely volatile himself. But I listened to him and I thought, yeah,
[Guest]: he's right. Actually, it's me who's doing it. It's not other people who are at fault.
[Guest]: And from that day on, I began to change. So I sort of became very even tempered. But when
[Guest]: it's not that I don't lose my temper, but it's completely the opposite, that I have
[Guest]: to be, I have to have my back to the wall, I have to be driven with my back to the wall
[Guest]: before I get angry. And then anger usually means silence. So when I'm annoyed with my
[Guest]: printer for that he's done a terrible job with something, he will know that madam is
[Guest]: not saying anything. So the other side of your silence is anger. Quite possibly, I hadn't
[Guest]: thought of it like that. But yeah, otherwise, I think I've just grown into becoming more,
[Guest]: more tolerant, more open, more mellow, all these things that have come with age. I have
[Guest]: to say that I have enjoyed the process of aging more than I imagined it. You know, when
[Guest]: you're young, you think you'll grow old. But with every decade that has come upon me, I
[Guest]: have actually really enjoyed that. But in the writing of this book, when I said in the
[Guest]: book that the person that you are is also different, in many ways, there is so much
[Guest]: more that I have learned about partition in the years that intervened between the writing
[Guest]: of that book and my coming back to it to revisit that story. And you realize that there is
[Guest]: just so much you can explore in something. And that also leads you to a whole range of
[Guest]: other areas. So in a sense, I don't know. It's difficult. I don't know. How am I different?
[Guest]: I really don't know, because I think I'm really the same person who has just grown older and
[Guest]: wiser and has become more tolerant and more receiving of more accommodating of difference
[Guest]: and of different views and more able to engage in those kinds of conversations. But, you
[Guest]: know, I'm still rotten at the Internet. I mean, of course, I use email and all of that,
[Guest]: but Instagram, Twitter, that, you know, Bhutalia, you need to do this to actually be where young
[Guest]: people are and to understand what they're doing. But it kind of defeats me and I don't
[Guest]: do that. So I'm eager to learn. And yet some things I'm reluctant to learn. I set myself
[Guest]: a challenge that before I turned 70, I would learn cycling because I missed out on cycling
[Guest]: when I moved from Ambala to Delhi. And so I did. I taught myself cycling and that's
[Guest]: OK. But the Internet, I haven't yet conquered in the same way.
[Amit Varma]: I think both of those are the right decision. Cycling, of course, it makes you healthier
[Amit Varma]: and you get fresh air, though I don't know how fresh air is in Delhi. But Internet also,
[Amit Varma]: I think not using it too much is a feature, not a bug, because it is such a distraction.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll get much more work done if you don't take up Instagram, Twitter. Trust me. So a
[Amit Varma]: couple of final questions. My penultimate question is something I usually end the show
[Amit Varma]: with where I ask my guests to recommend books, music, films that have meant a lot to them,
[Amit Varma]: to me and to our listeners. So not necessarily a best of list or anything like that, but
[Amit Varma]: things that are close to your heart and that mean something to you that you cherish. Could
[Amit Varma]: be books about feminism, could be books about anything, could be Mills and Boone, could
[Amit Varma]: be, you know, any films, music, whatever, what is close to your heart.
[Guest]: You know, this is a question you should never put to a publisher. There is no way I can
[Guest]: answer this. Every single book that I have published, that we have published, is really
[Amit Varma]: close to my heart.
[Amit Varma]: Let me make it easy for you so your authors don't beat you up. Nothing you've published
[Guest]: can be included in this.
[Guest]: I know, I knew you were going to say that. But even so, I read so much and read so eclectically
[Guest]: and so widely that it's really hard for me to pin down anything. And for years I have
[Guest]: avoided this question. So now you're putting me on the spot and I really can't think of
[Guest]: an answer. But let me see if I can.
[Guest]: You know, music, films, I love music and I love listening to all kinds of music. And
[Guest]: I at one stage as a young person harbored, like every young person does, the desire to
[Guest]: be able to sing and all of that. I'm useless at it. I think I'm tone deaf. I can't sing
[Guest]: or to save my life, although my family is very musical. But yeah, I love listening to
[Guest]: music and Hindustani classical music is really what I listen to a lot. One of my favorites
[Guest]: is Kumar Gandharva and Nirgun Bhajans, which are wonderful. And also some of the, you know,
[Guest]: Bhule Shah and others sung by Nusrat and Reshma and so many others. Those are things that
[Guest]: I love because those are somehow also so reminiscent for me of Punjab and of the close links between
[Guest]: Pakistan and Punjab. So those really move me and I can listen to them endlessly. At
[Guest]: one time I was very taken by the, you know, when you start reading, so I'm not a religious
[Guest]: person at all, but the Ek Omkar that comes at the beginning of the Granth Sahib when
[Guest]: you start opening the Granth Sahib and reading it, I was very taken by Harshdeep Kaur's version
[Guest]: of it. And I made it my ringtone on my phone and my colleagues gave me grief, so much grief
[Guest]: for it. And they kept saying to me, turn that damn thing off, turn that damn thing off enough.
[Guest]: So finally I had to give it up and I got a new phone, the ringtone changed anyway. Films
[Guest]: wise, I don't know, but I would say some of the Gurudutt films, Chaudhary Ka Chand, Pyaasa,
[Guest]: these are wonderful, wonderful films, which are really moving also. I also say that because
[Guest]: I have a very dear friend who's worked on Gurudutt and has shown me, you know, talked
[Guest]: about those films and broken them down for me in terms of light and song and all of that.
[Guest]: So some of those are rather wonderful. And long ago, I watched a film that stayed in
[Guest]: my mind. I don't think it's a Bollywood film, sorry, a Hollywood film, but it's an English
[Guest]: film called A Question of Silence. The reason it stayed in my mind is it is a film in which
[Guest]: two women randomly kill somebody in a shop for a particular reason and are then defended
[Guest]: by a woman lawyer. And it kind of stayed in my head because it speaks to the routine small
[Guest]: acts of violence that women face every day and what you were talking about, the cumulative
[Guest]: anger and how that anger sometimes finds an outlet in a completely irrational act. I saw
[Guest]: it a long time ago. I don't even remember when. And I would never think of it as my
[Guest]: favourite film. But because you pushed me to think of a film, that one came to mind.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm mentioning it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm glad I pushed you. I can't wait to watch it myself. And my final question, a two part
[Amit Varma]: question really, if there are young people who want to work with you, how do they get
[Amit Varma]: in touch? And if there's anyone listening to this who actually wants to contribute to
[Amit Varma]: your cause financially, then how are they to do so?
[Guest]: So young people wanting to work with us, I mean, they can just write to us. There aren't
[Guest]: that many opportunities in Zuban because it's a small organisation. Up until two years ago,
[Guest]: we used to run a very good, even if I say it myself, but a very solidly thought out
[Guest]: internship programme. And we used to advertise that people could apply and we would then
[Guest]: do a selection. But it went for a toss because of the pandemic. And now we are thinking of
[Guest]: reviving it. So it'll take us some time to get that back on track because we want to
[Guest]: do it properly. In terms of jobs, also what we are doing is we are trying to make Zuban
[Guest]: a genuinely diverse and inclusive space. So we've taken a decision that for the immediate
[Guest]: future, whatever jobs we have will be in reserved categories. And we've already done two jobs
[Guest]: like that and maybe one or two more. So people get very frustrated because they can't understand
[Guest]: why this reserved category thing. But it's an important thing to do. And to me, it's
[Guest]: part of the feminism that we want to practice. But the jobs in Zuban are rare and we don't
[Guest]: do projects on which people can work, but they can always write to us. We are pretty
[Guest]: good about that and we will get back to them and tell them what's possible and what's not
[Guest]: possible. And in terms of people wanting to contribute financially to Zuban, I mean, we
[Guest]: would welcome it and they can do that. And what they can do is we actually don't have
[Guest]: the details, bank details, up on our website. But if they write to us, we can give them
[Guest]: those and I'll put them up on the website also. And we do have ATG and 12A so they can
[Guest]: get a tax rebate on that if they want to. So that would be great because we sound like
[Guest]: we are very successful, but we are poor as church mice and we can always do with more
[Guest]: funds, but that's not the most important thing.
[Amit Varma]: I think in financial terms, you may be poor as church mice, but looked at in other ways,
[Amit Varma]: I think you are rich and you've enriched the world. So thank you for coming on the show,
[Guest]: Urvashi.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. Pleasure talking to you. Really enjoyed it.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, share it with anyone you think might be interested.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the show notes as well. Enter rabbit holes at will. Do explore the books published
[Amit Varma]: by Zuban and do also pick up Urvashi's book, especially The Other Side of Silence, which
[Amit Varma]: I loved so much. Urvashi, with much wisdom, has stayed off social media. But you know,
[Amit Varma]: I am not so wise. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-B-A-R-M-A. You can
[Amit Varma]: browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.